Acta Politica, 2005, 40, (284–298)
r 2005 Palgrave Macmillan Ltd 0001-6810/05 $30.00
www.palgrave-journals.com/ap

Experimenting with a Democratic Ideal:
Deliberative Polling and Public Opinion
James S. Fishkina and Robert C. Luskinb
a
Department of Communication, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
E-mail: jfishkin@stanford.edu
b
Department of Government, Texas University, Austin, USA.
E-mail: rcl@mail.la.utexas.edu

The values of deliberation and political equality have proven hard to achieve
simultaneously. Deliberative Polling, which embodies both, provides a useful
window on deliberative democracy. The results, responding to ‘defeatist,’
‘extenuationist,’ and ‘alarmist’ critiques, show that ordinary people can deliberate,
that they benefit from doing so, and that the process neither biases nor polarizes
their opinions.
Acta Politica (2005) 40, 284–298. doi:10.1057/palgrave.ap.5500121
Keywords: Deliberative Polling; deliberative democracy; political equality; informed opinion

Introduction
Democratic reform has long striven to realize the apparently contrary values of
political equality and deliberation. The American system initially emphasized
deliberation, then progressively added institutions serving political equality.1
Primaries, recall elections, and the direct election of US Senators have given
the public more voice in choosing its representatives. Initiatives and referenda
have given it more ability to make policy directly. Polling has had a similar if
more advisory effect.
But this march toward political equality has had the unintended consequence
of diminishing deliberation (Fishkin, 1991). As innumerable surveys have
shown, most ordinary citizens know and think remarkably little about politics
(Luskin, 1987; Kinder, 1998; Price, 1999). Thus decisions by referendum
involve far less deliberation than decisions by legislatures, and even decisions
by legislatures may involve less deliberation than they used to, before
legislators had primaries, direct election campaigns (in the case of the US
Senate), and poll results to worry about.
This tension between political equality and deliberation is hardly unique to
the US. While the details differ from country to country, the democratic world
has seen a general trend toward ever more direct democracy. The franchise has

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

285

expanded, referenda have proliferated, and even mass primaries for candidate
selection, indigenous to the US, have been spreading. But the same rip tide is
everywhere evident. Giving the mass public, which is not generally very
deliberative, more say has meant decreasing the level of deliberation behind
political decision-making. As political equality has gone up, deliberation has
gone down.

Deliberation and Political Equality
But let us sketch what we mean by ‘political equality’ and, especially,
‘deliberation.’ By political equality we mean equal consideration of
everyone’s preferences, where ‘everyone’ refers to some relevant population
or demos, and ‘equal consideration’ means a process of equal counting so
that everyone has the same ‘voting power’ (an equal chance of being the
decisive voter, when the voters are described anonymously, without reference
to past voting patterns or current preferences). Note that everyone can still
have the same voting power if the voters are a subset of the population selected
by lot.2
The root of deliberation is ‘weighing,’ which could be collective, individual,
or both — involving discussion, rumination, or both. For present purposes, we
take deliberation to be a weighing of competing considerations through
discussion that is:3
Informed (and thus informative). Arguments should be supported by
appropriate and reasonably accurate factual claims.
Balanced. Arguments should be met by contrary arguments.
Conscientious. The participants should be willing to talk and listen, with
civility and respect.
Substantive. Arguments should be considered sincerely on their merits, not
how they are made or who is making them.
Comprehensive. All points of view held by significant portions of the
population should receive attention.4
While excluding much everyday conversation, these criteria are still relatively
undemanding. They do not require any particular style or quality of thought,
much less the acceptance of any given premises. They are strictly procedural.
They stop far short, for example, of notions of deliberation requiring that
participants reason on the basis of philosophical principles that everyone can
be expected to accept (Cohen, 1997; Gutmann and Thompson, 2003).5
Viewed as a continuum, deliberation so defined is attainable. Even the real
world sees some; experimental conditions can induce much more. This enables
us to move from thought experiments to real experiments — to observe the
effects of increasing deliberation. For the controversial stipulations required to
complete a thought experiment, we can substitute the behavior of the
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

286

participants in an actual experiment — not behind a hypothetical veil of
ignorance but in the actual world of politics and policy.6

Deliberation vs Political Equality?
In some respects, we have painted the deliberation-equality tradeoff too
starkly. For one thing, much of the discussion among political elites is
posturing or negotiation rather than deliberation. Minds may change on
concrete legislative proposals, but often because negotiation has altered the
details or the context (as in logrolling) rather than because minds have changed
on more fundamental values or empirical premises. Legislators are representatives, after all, and elected to support or oppose certain things (and because
they already do so). They are also constrained by their parties. So even elitelevel politics is not necessarily that deliberative.
Theoretically, indeed, it may even be the mass public that has the greater
possibility of real deliberation. Citizens are not bound by constituencies or
parties and — in electorates of any size — are not casting votes worth
surveilling or bargaining over. They have no need to posture or negotiate.
Hence they are freer to alter their views, and not just on the merits of concrete
legislative proposals but also on more fundamental questions of what is and
what should be.
As matters stand — and are likely to stand — however, this is only a
possibility. For most people, most of the time, politics is merely ‘a side show in
the great circus of life’ (Dahl, 1961). Most people think and know little about
politics. They discuss it, moreover, mainly with others very like themselves and
sharing similar views (Ulbig and Funk, 1999; Mutz and Martin, 2001;
Huckfeldt et al., 2004). And that is unlikely to change very much. Not for the
public as a whole, at least.
Conventional polling
In the beginning, public opinion polling combined aspirations for both political
equality (via scientific sampling) and deliberation. The pioneering figure
George Gallup touted polling as a serious instrument of democratic reform,
calling it the ‘sampling referendum’ and painting it as a way of scaling up the
democracy of the New England town meeting to the whole nation.
Today, the New England town meeting idea has, in a sense, been restored.
The wide distribution of daily newspapers reporting the views of statesmen
on issues of the day, the almost universal ownership of radios which bring
the whole nation with the hearing of any voice, and now the advent of the
sampling referendum which produces a means of determining quickly the
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

287

response of the public to debate on issues of the day, have in effect created a
town meeting on a national scale (Gallup, 1939).
Gallup thought that the media and polling would together allow people to hear
political leaders’ opinions and both hear and express their own.
Good modern polling, based on random sampling, does serve political
equality, since simple random sampling is just selection by lot, but it still entails
no real deliberation. Thus most of the opinions captured by conventional
polling are cognitively threadbare. The typical respondent answering the
typical political attitude item has barely ever thought about the question before
being interviewed and can call on precious little information in answering it.
These top-of-the-head responses are what Converse (1964) famously called
‘nonattitudes,’ although ‘minimal attitudes’ (Luskin, 1987) may more often be
closer to the still-sad reality.
So conventional polling has inevitably disappointed Gallup’s hopes. It has
indeed altered the texture of modern democracy, but not by taking it any closer
to the virtues of the New England town meeting.7 The opinions it tallies are not
informed by any thorough airing or consideration of alternative views. Rather,
they reflect normal, everyday levels of inattention and disengagement. They
express public opinion as it is — seasoned strongly by neither information nor
reflection.

Deliberative Polling and Deliberative Democracy
But what if the level of deliberation could be raised, if not for the whole
public, at least for a random sample thereof? What if polling could be
made deliberative? Deliberative Polling (Fishkin, 1991, 1995) explores this
possibility by exposing random samples to balanced information, encouraging them to weigh opposing arguments in discussions with heterogeneous interlocutors, and then harvesting their more considered opinions.
It is a way, at least in miniature, of serving both deliberation and equality.
The deliberation lies in the learning, thinking, and talking that distinguish
Deliberative Polls from conventional ones. The political equality stems
from random sampling. In theory, every citizen has an equal chance
of being chosen to participate, and on average, over infinitely repeated
sampling from the same population, the sample would resemble the
population exactly.8
This solution to the problem of combining political equality and deliberation
actually dates back to ancient Athens, where deliberative microcosms of
several hundred chosen by lot made many key decisions. With the demise of
Athenian democracy, it fell into desuetude, then oblivion. As noted, the public
opinion poll revived random sampling but without deliberation. Deliberative
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

288

polling, in recombining the two, is an empirical exploration of deliberative
democracy.
To flesh out some more of the design, a Deliberative Poll begins by drawing
and interviewing a random sample. It is important for representativeness and
political equality that the sampling be random rather than by self-selection,
proximity (‘convenience sampling’), or quota. Only random sampling assures
everyone an equal probability of being chosen to participate. Only random
sampling leads to samples that average out, over infinitely repeated sampling,
to the population. Only random sampling allows measurement of the degree of
certainty associated with the sample estimates (in the form of ‘estimated
standard errors,’ ‘margins of error,’ ‘confidence intervals,’ ‘levels of statistical
significance,’ etc.).
Those agreeing to participate are sent carefully balanced briefing materials,
laying out the major arguments for and against policy proposals prominent in
elite-level discussions. Embedded in these arguments are both empirical
premises, which are relatively debatable, and more purely factual information,
which is not. The document, which is also made publicly available, is meant to
provide a starting point for discussion. Typically, an advisory board of issue
stakeholders vet it for balance and accuracy.
The participants are then brought to a single site for the deliberations,
typically lasting a weekend. During the weekend, they alternate between
discussing the issues in randomly assigned small groups and putting questions
formed in the small group discussions to panels of policy experts and policymakers in plenary sessions. The small groups are led by trained moderators,
who maintain an atmosphere of civility and mutual respect, encourage the
diffident, restrain the loquacious, and ensure that all the major proposals and
all the major arguments for and against them in the briefing document get aired.
The panelists in the plenary sessions respond to the questions formed in the
small groups. These are not simple questions of fact, to which there are
undebatably right and wrong answers. Rather, they concern the policy
alternatives’ consequences and costs, the tradeoffs they may entail, and the
like. Given that the answers are generally debatable — indeed are the stuff of
debate — it is important that the panelists represent a balanced set of
perspectives. The composition of the panels, like the briefing document is often
supervised by an advisory board.
The participants answer questions about their views both when first
interviewed (just before being invited to participate) and again at the end of
the deliberative weekend. A good many Deliberative Polls add one or more
(quasi) control groups — independent random samples that do not deliberate
— to provide assurance that the changes we see stem from the deliberative
treatment rather than from contemporaneous great-world influences affecting
everyone.9
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

289

The treatment, consisting of everything that happens between the moment of
recruitment and the end of the weekend, can be broken down into several
weeks of unstructured, at-home deliberation anticipating the weekend and the
structured on-site deliberation during the weekend itself. During the
anticipatory period, the participants, knowing that they will be part of a
visible (usually televised) event, begin to discuss the issues more with family,
friends, and co-workers, to pay more attention to relevant stories in the media,
and even, in some cases, to research the issues in the library or on the web.
This anticipatory deliberation, while important, is less than ideal in a couple
of respects. It is, for one thing, socially homogeneous. People tend to talk with
people like themselves — from the same social circles and circumstances. In the
second place, like most real-word deliberation, it is imbalanced. People tend to
turn to sources of information and conversational partners they already agree
with. On-site, by contrast, the discussion is balanced (thanks, as necessary, to
the moderators), and the discussion groups mostly heterogeneous (thanks to
random assignment). The anticipatory deliberation is real-world deliberation,
with its existing limitations, only quantitatively greater. The on-site deliberation is not only quantitatively still greater but qualitatively different — closer
to the deliberative ideal. The briefing documents and expert panels are
balanced, the moderators enforce balance in the small group discussions, and
random assignment makes for heterogeneous discussion partners. In short, the
participants are forced to consider alternative arguments and points of view
and to discuss them with others very unlike themselves.
The on-site deliberations have typically been telecast in one fashion or
another. Often the plenary sessions have been broadcast. Sometimes both they
and some of the small group discussions are taped and edited for later
broadcast. The Deliberative Poll has been called ‘a poll with a human face’
(McCombs and Reynolds, 1999) because it gives a human face, and voice, to
the process of informed opinion change.

Deliberative Polling and the Objections to Deliberative Democracy
Not everyone working in this intersection of political theory and empirical
political science is a fan of deliberative democracy. Three prominent objections
can be characterized as:
Defeatist. This objection is that deliberation is impossible. The public is too
confused, inconsistent, and ignorant to be able to be worth consulting about
policy issues (Schumpeter, 1942; Posner, 2004a, b). Any efforts to consult a
‘public voice’ will be delusive, so it is best not to try.
Extenuationist. This second objection is that deliberation is unnecessary. The
public can use heuristics and simple cues to approximate its more informed
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

290

preferences (Popkin, 1992; Lupia and McCubbins, 1998). Deliberation is thus a
waste of time.10
Alarmist. The third objection is that deliberation is harmful. It can be done
(contra the defeatists) and can alter preferences (contra the extenuationists) but
alters them for the worse. Inevitably, certain groups, and their preferences, are
advantaged in public discussion (Sanders, 1997). Within discussion groups,
moreover, majorities tend to become larger and opinions more extreme — not
as a function of the strength of competing arguments but simply as a function
of the initial balance of opinion (Sunstein, 2003).
Deliberative Polling provides a means of examining these objections
empirically. The results say something about whether or not the mass public
is capable of deliberation, something about the extent to which deliberation
makes a difference, and something about the extent to which it polarizes
preferences across discussion groups and privileges certain people’s preferences
within them.
Here are some relevant patterns in the results of the analyses we have done to
date:
1. The participants are representative. We start with high-quality random
samples, and then compare the respondents who choose to attend, an
admittedly self-selected subsample, with those who do not. Both
demographically and attitudinally, the statistically significant differences
are remarkably few and typically modest. The participants are generally a
bit older, better educated, and more interested in and knowledgeable about
the topic than the nonparticipants, but not by much. The usual biases in
self-selection appear to be nearly erased by the unusual incentives for
participation. Thus the participant sample, like the interview sample, is
highly representative. (Fishkin and Luskin, 1999, Luskin et al., 2002, 2004)
Political equality is served.
2. Opinions often change. At the individual level, some opinions always
change, with some participants moving one way, and some the other. Some
portion of that could be just the random bouncing-around of stillunderdeveloped attitudes. But more impressively and consequentially,
there is usually some statistically significant net change as well. Well more
than half of the policy attitude items we have posed have shown
statistically significant net change, as have a still larger fraction of the
much smaller number questions about vote intention. Some of these
changes have been extremely large (Fishkin and Luskin, 1999, Luskin
et al., 1999a, 1999b, 2000, 2002, 2004).
3. Vote intentions often change. These changes have tended to be still more
statistically significant, as well as substantively larger. In Britain, on the
eve of the 1997 general election, for example, the Tories and Labour each
lost about 10% and the Liberal Democrats gained about 20% of our
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

291

sample’s votes (Luskin et al, 1999a). In Australia in 1999, support for the
referendum proposal to make the country a Republic increased by 16%
(Luskin et al., 2000). Only in the case of the 2000 Danish referendum on
the euro was there no appreciable change, presumably because the Danish
public was already comparatively well informed about EU matters after six
previous referendums on them (Hansen, 2003).
4. The participants gain information. We regularly ask questions gauging the
factual information the participants possess about the topics under
discussion. Less regularly, we add a question or two tapping more general
political knowledge, as of the party’s locations on a liberal–conservative or
left–right dimension. The results show impressive information gains
(Fishkin and Luskin, 1999; Luskin et al., 1999a, 1999b, 2000, 2002,
2004). Not everybody masters every fact, to be sure, but it is a rare topicspecific information item that does not show a statistically significant
average gain. Mean gains of around 10% are extremely common. Some are
distinctly larger, a few gigantic. In the 1999 Australian Deliberative Poll on
the country’s becoming a republic, the percentage knowing that ‘under the
referendum proposal, the prime minister ‘could remove the president at
any time but must later obtain approval from the house of representatives’
rose from 16 to 73% (Luskin et al., 2000). The participants also seem to
gain some greater knowledge of politics more generally, as the percentages
correctly locating the major parties on a liberal–conservative or left–right
scale generally increase.
5. The changes in opinions and votes and the information gains are related.
By and large, the preference changes are information-driven, in the sense
that it is the participants who emerge knowing the most who
disproportionately account for the net change in the sample as a whole
(Luskin et al., 2002, 2004).
6. The changes in opinions and votes are unrelated to social location.
Regressions of both signed and absolute preference change on the panoply
of available sociodemographic variables produce R2 s just barely above
zero, precious few statistically significant individual coefficient estimates,
and insignificant F-statistics (meaning that the null hypothesis that none of
the regressors has any effect cannot confidently be rejected). There is no
appreciable tendency for people of given sorts to change more one in one
direction than the other, nor to change to greater or lesser degree (Luskin
et al., 2002).
7. Policy attitudes and vote intentions tend to be more predictable, and to hinge
more on normatively desirable criteria, after deliberation than before. Thus
regressions of policy attitudes on collections of values and empirical
premises that ought to affect them tend to carry bigger adjusted R2 s after
deliberation than before. Similarly, US primary election voters tend to give
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

292

much greater weight than the control group to the candidates’ policy
positions in deciding how to vote (Iyengar et al., 2005).
8. Single-Peakedness increases. Defining single-peakedness as a matter of
degree (as the size of the largest subset whose policy preferences are singlepeaked in the traditional binary sense, divided by the size of the sample),
we find that deliberation increases single-peakedness, at least on issues that
are not already highly salient and where preferences are not already singlepeaked (List et al., 2000). The participants may not agree more after
deliberating, but they do seem to agree more in this sense about what they
are agreeing or disagreeing about. The importance of this result is that
single-peakedness (in this continuous sense) reduces the probability of
Arrovian preference cycles undermining the meaning of majority rule.
9. The increases in single-peakedness and information gains are related. The
increases in single-peakedness stem primarily from those participants
emerging most informed (List et al., 2000).
10. Preferences do not necessarily ‘polarize’ across discussion groups. Sunstein’s
(2003) arguments would lead one to expect that they should. But about
half the small groups polarize, but about half do not (Luskin et al., 2002,
2004).11
11. Preferences do not necessarily homogenize within groups. Conformity
mechanisms would lead one to expect convergence. Or, to the extent that
the initial distribution of opinions affects the distribution of arguments
expressed, initially popular positions may simply receive more support in
the discussion, which might also produce convergence. In fact, however,
the variance of opinion sometimes decreases, sometimes increases (Luskin
et al, 2002, 2004). One reason may be that the moderators, enforcing
balance, keep the distribution of opinions expressed from resembling too
closely the initial distribution of opinions.
12. Balanced deliberation tends to promote balanced learning. Given facts
are sometimes more comfortable for one side of an argument than the
other. Our evidence in this case comes from just one Deliberative Poll. In
the Danish Deliberative Poll before the euro referendum, some of the
factual information was more comforting to the ‘yes’ camp, some to the
‘no’ camp. We also, uncharacteristically, had an additional wave of
measurement on arrival on-site. Thus we could see that in the period
leading up to the deliberative weekend, during which the participants
deliberated with family, friends, and coworkers in imbalanced fashion, yes
supporters learned more of the ‘yes facts,’ and no supporters more of the
‘no facts’ but that during the weekend itself, with its balanced deliberation,
the yes supporters picked up more of the ‘no facts’ they had hitherto
avoided, and the no supporters more of the ‘yes facts’ they had avoided
(Hansen, 2003).
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

293

What, then, do these results say about the objections to deliberative
democracy? First, defeatism. One suggestive result is 6. That the changes of
opinion and vote intention are largely uninfluenced by sociodemographic
factors, including education suggests that the process seems to be accessible to
all social strata. Other relevant results are that the participants learn quite a lot
and that the opinion changes tend to be driven by that learning (4 and 5).
People may ordinarily not know or think much about politics and have poorly
developed political views as a result, but it is clearly possible for them to learn
and thus change their views as appropriate. Not every participant learns or
changes measurably in a Deliberative Poll, but many do.
In addition, 8 and 9 indicate that deliberation lessens the collective
confusions of mass democracy, creating a shared public space for public
opinion. Hence Posner’s (2004) claim that public consultation will lead to
confusion and the antinomies of rational choice is exactly wrong. If anything,
the desirability of avoiding preference cycles argues for deliberation, although
we note Mackie’s (2003) recent argument that Riker’s (1982) anxieties about
cycles were overstated from the beginning.
Next, extenuationism. The implication of the extenuationist position is that
getting people to learn and think about an issue should not greatly change their
views. They are already at or near their ‘full-information’ preferences. But 2
and 3, backed up by 4 and 5, falsify this claim. So, only a shade less directly,
does 7. Post-deliberation attitudes and vote intentions are different, sometimes
dramatically different — because many of the participants are thinking and
learning more about the issues, and realizing that the positions they initially
held were not where they really wanted to be.
Finally, alarmism. Sunstein’s (2003) ‘law of group polarization’ is that a
discussion group whose mean position is one side of an attitude scale will tend,
post-discussion, to move further out on the same side. He points to two reasons
for this effect: the imbalance in the argument pool and ‘social comparison’
(conformity) mechanisms. The evidence from mock jury experiments does seem
to support Sunstein’s position.
But our small groups are not juries, and the kind of deliberation we are
seeking to foster is not that of the jury room. There is no immediate collective
outcome, no verdict, to be reached and no requirement of consensus, not to
mention unanimity.12 The ‘voting,’ moreover, occurs only in the ‘secret ballot’
of the final confidential questionnaire, which may limit social comparison
effects. The deliberation in a Deliberative Poll is mainly everyday political
conversation improved — more informed, more balanced, more conscientious,
more substantive and more comprehensive. The element of balance may be
particularly important, in equalizing the argument pool. Thus 10 and to some
extent 11 indicate, as Sunstein (2003) himself has acknowledged, that
Deliberative Polling data do not support the ‘law of group polarization.’
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

294

The other deliberative pathology cited by alarmists is the domination of the
discussions by more privileged members of the society, presumptively welleducated and articulate white males. In this case, we can report only
impressions — both ours and the participants’ — but have the data to do
more. It should be noted that the moderators try to ensure that no one
dominates the discussion and that everyone has a chance to talk, but the extent
to which they succeed in this effort is an empirical question. One relevant
observation is that overwhelming majorities of the participants indicate, in
response to a question in post-deliberation questionnaires, that in their view
the discussions were not dominated by only a few of their number. That is our
impression too. Sometimes the moderator has to restrain a particularly voluble
participant or two to achieve this result, but usually that is not even necessary.
A simple, less subjective approach we intend trying would be to see if the other
participants routinely move in the direction of the views the members of
privileged groups (say, educated white males) come in with. We hope to report
on this in the near future. At some later point, more ambitiously, we hope to
analyze recordings of small group sessions with this among many other issues
in mind.

From Thought Experiments to Real Experiments
‘Thought experiments’ imagining what people would decide under morally
relevant counterfactual conditions have become a staple of contemporary
political theory (Fishkin, 1992). But why not move beyond armchair
empiricism? If a counterfactual situation is morally relevant, why not do a
real social science experiment to see what the appropriate counterfactual
might actually look like? And if that counterfactual is both discoverable
and normatively relevant, why not then let the rest of the world know
about it?
Like Rawls’s ‘original position,’ Deliberative Polling, in gauging what people
would think if they thought, knew, and talked more about the issues, has some
recommending force — to policy-makers and, at least conditionally, to the
public itself. While citizens should consider the merits of policy and electoral
choices for themselves, they do take cues from conventional polling results.
Deliberative Polling offers similar but better cues, resting on a more informed
and thoughtful consideration of the issues by the sample.
The experimental treatment is avowedly, intentionally aimed at creating a
counterfactual. The treatment sets the participants to deliberating more
intensively than most of them ever do in real life, and the deliberation is more
informed, balanced, substantive, conscientious, and comprehensive than in real
life. Many experiments are similarly counterfactual. Each explanatory variable
has some naturally occurring range, and the object of the treatment is
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

295

sometimes to move individual subjects up or down within that range,
sometimes to move them above or below it. How many people spend
significant time comparing the lengths of lines projected onto a screen in front
of them, in the company of other people insisting that obviously shorter lines
are longer (Asch, 1956), to cite one famous example? But even it were not
common in everyday experimentation, the counterfactual element in Deliberative Polling would be essential. The key in this effort to fuse normative and
empirical research agendas is to create a treatment condition embodying the
appropriate normative relevance.
The design has, and needs, both internal and external validity, the wellknown distinction being that internal validity concerns questions of cause and
effect, while external validity concerns questions of generalization (Campbell
and Stanley, 1963). How sure can we be that x’s apparent effect on y is really
x’s effect on y, rather than either y’s effect on x or the effect of some other
variable z confounded with x? That is the question of internal validity. How
sure can we be that the treatments, measurements, and subjects generalize to
the outside-world phenomena we are trying to characterize? That is the
question of external validity. Well-done surveys are high on external validity,
well done experiments high on internal validity.
What is important to us is to get a maximally reliable picture of
a counterfactual public forming and revising its opinions under normatively desirable conditions. High internal validity implies some assurance
that any changes of opinion stem from the deliberative treatment
(and mediating variables like information). High external validity implies
some assurance that what we see is what we would see if we could subject
the whole public to the same treatment. Without the former, we could not
have much confidence we were seeing deliberative public opinion. Without
the latter, we could not have much confidence we were seeing deliberative
public opinion.
Many questions remain, above all concerning the contributions of the
individual elements of the deliberative treatment. How much does each of the
qualities we have incorporated into our definition of deliberation matter? How
much difference would it make to keep the treatment the same but settle for
real-world levels of balance, say? How much do the presence and behavior of
the moderators matter? The sociodemographic and attitudinal heterogeneity of
the small groups? How much of the effect occurs during the anticipatory
period, and how much during the weekend? How much difference do the
briefing materials make? What difference would it make to replace them with
easy access to a variety of real-world journals of opinion like the New Republic
and the National Review (which might increase information but would surely
reduce balance)? What difference would it make to the occurrence of
polarization in Sunstein’s sense to make the harvesting of opinions less
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

296

confidential? And so forth. We have only begun to investigate how deliberation
produces the effects we have documented.
References
Asch, S.E. (1956) ‘Studies of independence and conformity: a minority of one against a unanimous
majority’, Psychological Monographs 70: (Whole No. 416).
Campbell, D.T. and Stanley, J.C. (1963) Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs for
Research, Chicago: Rand-McNally.
Cohen, J. (1997) ‘Procedure and Substance in Deliberative Democracy’, in J. Bohman and W. Rehg
(eds.) Deliberative Democracy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 67–92.
Converse, P.E (1964) ‘The Nature of Belief Systems in Mass Publics’, in D.E. Apter (ed.) Ideology
and Discontent, New York: Free Press.
Dahl, R.A. (1961) Who Governs, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Dahl, R.A. (2002) How Democratic is the American Constitution?, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Fishkin, J.S. (1991) Democracy and Deliberation: New Directions for Democratic Reform, New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Fishkin, J.S. (1992) The Dialogue of Justice, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Fishkin, J.S. (1995) The Voice of the People: Public Opinion and Democracy, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Fishkin, J.S. and Luskin, R.C. (1999) ‘Bringing Deliberation to the Democratic Dialogue’, in M.
McCombs and A. Reynolds (eds.) The Poll with a Human Face: The National Issues Convention
Experiment in Political Communication, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gallup, G. (1939) ‘Public opinion in a democracy, The Stafford Little Lectures, Princeton
University Extension Fund.
Goodin, R.E. (2003) ‘Deliberation Within’, in J.S. Fishkin and P. Laslett (eds.) Debating
Deliberative Democracy, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gutmann, A. and Thompson, D. (2003) ‘Deliberative Democracy Beyond Process’, in J.S. Fishkin
and P. Laslett (eds.) ‘Special Issue: Debating Deliberative Democracy’ Journal of Political
Philosophy 10: 153–174.
Hansen, K.M. (2003) ‘Deliberative Democracy and Opinion Formation’, Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Southern Denmark, Dept of Political Science and Public Management.
Huckfeldt, R., Johnson, P.E. and Sprague, J. (2004) Political Disagreement: The Survival of Diverse
Opinions within Communication Networks, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Iyengar, S., Luskin, R.C. and Fishkin, J.S. (2005) Deliberative Preferences in the Presidential
Nomination Campaign: Evidence from an Online Deliberative Poll. Research paper, Center for
Deliberative Democracy, Stanford: Stanford University.
Kinder, D.R. (1998) ‘Opinion and Action in the Realm of Politics’, in D.T. Gilbert, S.T. Fiske and
L. Gardner (eds.) The Handbook of Social Psychology, Vol., 2, New York: Oxford University
Press.
List, C., McLean, I., Fishkin, J.S. and Luskin, R.C. (2000) Deliberation, preference structuration
and cycles: evidence from deliberative polls, Paper presented at the University of Texas School of
Law conference on ‘Deliberating About Deliberative Democracy’.
Lupia, A. and McCubbins, M. (1998) The Democratic Dilemma, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Luskin, R.C. (1987) ‘Measuring political sophistication’, American Journal of Political Science 31:
856–899.

Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

297
Luskin, R.C., Fishkin, J.S. and Jowell, R. (2002) ‘Considered Opinions: deliberative polling in
Britain’, British Journal of Political Science 32: 455–487.
Luskin, R.C. (2002) ‘From Denial to Extenuation (and Finally Beyond): Political Sophistication
and Citizen Performance’, in J.H. Kuklinski (ed.) Thinking about Political Psychology, New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Luskin, R.C. (2003) ‘The Heavenly Public: What Would the Ideal Democratic Citizenry Be Like?’,
in M.B. MacKuen and G. Rabinowitz (eds.) Electoral Democracy, Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Luskin, R.C., Fishkin, J.S., Jowell, R. and Park, A. (1999a) Learning and voting in Britain: insights
from the deliberative poll, Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Political
Science Association, Atlanta.
Luskin, R.C., Fishkin, J.S. and Plane, D.L. (1999b) Deliberative polling and policy outcomes:
electric utility issues in Texas, Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Association for
Public Policy Analysis and Management, Washington, DC.
Luskin, R.C., Fishkin, J.S., McAllister, I., Higley, J. and Ryan, P. (2000) Information effects in
referendum voting: evidence from the Australian deliberative poll, Presented at the annual meeting
of the American Political Science Association, Washington, DC.
Luskin, R.C., Iyengar, S. and Fishkin, J.S. (2004) ‘Considered Opinions on U.S. Foreign Policy:
Face-to-Face versus Online Deliberative Polling’, Research paper, Center for Deliberative
Democracy, Stanford: Stanford University.
Mackie, G. (2003) Democracy Defended, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCombs, M. and Reynolds, A. (eds.) (1999) A Poll with a Human Face: The National Issues
Convention Experiment in Political Communication, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mutz, D.C. and Martin, P.S. (2001) ‘Facilitating communication across lines of political difference:
the role of mass media’, American Political Science Review 95: 97–118.
Popkin, S. (1992) The Reasoning Voter, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Posner, R. (2004a) Law, Pragmatism and Democracy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Posner, R. (2004b) ‘Smooth Sailing’, Legal Affairs, Jan/February: 40–42.
Price, V. (1999) ‘Political Information’, in J.P. Robinson, P.R. Shaver, and L.S. Wrightsman (eds.)
Measures of Political Attitude, San Diego: Academic Press.
Riker, W. (1982) Liberalism Against Populism, Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Sanders, L. (1997) ‘Against Deliberation’, Political Theory 25: 347–376.
Schumpeter, J.A. (1942) Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, New York: Harper and Row.
Sunstein, C.R. (2003) ‘The Law of Group Polarization’, in J.S. Fishkin and P. Laslett (eds.)
Debating Deliberative Democracy, Oxford: Blackwell.
Ulbig, S.G. and Funk, G.L. (1999) ‘Conflict avoidance and political participation’, Political
Behavior 21: 265–282.

Notes
1 Of course, some nontrivial inequality remains (Dahl, 2002).
2 This is ‘formal political equality’ (Fishkin, 1991).
3 For more on the qualities of deliberation see Fishkin (1991).
4 Alternatively, we could define deliberation simply as discussion, the distinguish between
different kinds of deliberation — balanced vs imbalanced, etc. Here we make deliberation
balanced by definition (Luskin, 2003).
5 We have simplified matters somewhat by defining deliberation as a process of discussion. At its
core, deliberation is a process of thought, or rumination, that will have the five characteristics
Acta Politica 2005 40

James S. Fishkin and Robert C. Luskin
Deliberative Polling

298
just mentioned to a significant degree. In theory, some have speculated that it could be achieved
internally (Goodin, 2003) by individuals thinking in isolation. We do not wish to rule out this
theoretical possibility, particularly with the development of new technologies that might
substitute for a dialogue with others. However, for the moment we stipulate that deliberation
requires interpersonal communication because the only way in which we are aware that the five
characteristics listed above could be achieved to a significant degree is through interpersonal
dialogue. And all our empirical efforts to explore it will involve interpersonal communication —
conversation either face to face or online via voice.
6 See Fishkin (1992) for an account of how even apparently trivial differences in the
characterization of the initial choice situation can lead to dramatically different principles. By
having a ‘thin’ characterization of the decision process and by allowing the participants in the
deliberative process to complete the decision through an actual experiment, we can avoid the
apparent arbitrariness of selecting one characterization of the choice situation over another as a
way to settle normative issues.
7 To be sure, even the New England town meeting may not actually have all the virtues of the
New England town meeting
8 The random sampling need not be ‘simple,’ but to serve equality it cannot be disproportionally
stratified.
9 The control group observations may be either post-test only or pre-test and post-test (Iyengar
et al., 2005; Luskin et al., 2004).
10 The term ‘extenuationist(m)’ is from Luskin (2002).
11 The exact numbers depend on the point of reference with respect to which the groups could be
said to be becoming more or less extreme (Luskin et al., 2002, 2004).
12 The only consensus ever sought in a Deliberative Poll is that a question would be worth asking of
the panelists in an ensuing plenary session. But questions are generally chosen precisely because
the group members disagree over the answer.

Acta Politica 2005 40

