Letter

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1507-6

Information gerrymandering and undemocratic
decisions
Alexander J. Stewart1*, Mohsen Mosleh2, Marina Diakonova3, Antonio A. Arechar2,4, David G. Rand2 & Joshua B. Plotkin5

People must integrate disparate sources of information when
making decisions, especially in social contexts. But information does
not always flow freely. It can be constrained by social networks1–3
and distorted by zealots and automated bots4. Here we develop a
voter game as a model system to study information flow in collective
decisions. Players are assigned to competing groups (parties) and
placed on an ‘influence network’ that determines whose voting
intentions each player can observe. Players are incentivized to
vote according to partisan interest, but also to coordinate their
vote with the entire group. Our mathematical analysis uncovers
a phenomenon that we call information gerrymandering: the
structure of the influence network can sway the vote outcome
towards one party, even when both parties have equal sizes and
each player has the same influence. A small number of zealots,
when strategically placed on the influence network, can also induce
information gerrymandering and thereby bias vote outcomes. We
confirm the predicted effects of information gerrymandering
in social network experiments with n = 2,520 human subjects.
Furthermore, we identify extensive information gerrymandering in
real-world influence networks, including online political discussions
leading up to the US federal elections, and in historical patterns of
bill co-sponsorship in the US Congress and European legislatures.
Our analysis provides an account of the vulnerabilities of collective
decision-making to systematic distortion by restricted information
flow. Our analysis also highlights a group-level social dilemma:
information gerrymandering can enable one party to sway decisions
in its favour, but when multiple parties engage in gerrymandering
the group loses its ability to reach consensus and remains trapped
in deadlock.
Distorted and false information threaten to disrupt public discourse and democratic decision-making5,6. Social media platforms
are particularly vulnerable, because they allow users to shut out dissenting voices1–3, while providing adversarial actors with anonymity
and opportunity to target messages for maximal effect7. The effect of
information distortion is not limited to the online world, but filters
out to traditional news media and voter behaviour8. Two distinct but
intertwined threats have received considerable attention: information
campaigns using fake news5,9 and automated bots4, and the growth of
polarized political debate10,11. These issues pose a considerable social
problem. Progress requires that we develop basic scientific methods
to understand how networks that constrain the flow of information
influence group decision-making.
Here we develop a voter game to study collective decisions under
incomplete information. The game is simple enough to analyse mathematically and to use in controlled experiments with human subjects,
yet it retains salient features of real-world collective decisions. Players
are split into two parties of equal size and allowed to change their voting intention over time in response to continuously updated polling
data. The aggregate polling information seen by a player is determined
by their placement on a directed graph, called the influence network.
Players are aware that polls represent a subset sampled from the entire

population. At the end of the game, players receive the maximum payoff
B if the final vote share for their assigned party exceeds a super-majority
threshold V in which V > 0.5; they receive a lower payoff b < B if the
vote share of the opposing party exceeds V; and they receive no payoff
if both parties fail to reach the threshold V, which we call ‘deadlock’
(Fig. 1). The possibility of deadlock forces players to consider both
their personal preferences and the voting intentions of others in their
decision-making.
We initially assume the payoff to the losing team is positive, b > 0,
which reflects a ‘compromise worldview’: it is preferable to reach some
decision than to end in deadlock. This payoff scheme captures the common practical value of broad consensus in collective decisions, even as
individuals pursue partisan preferences12,13. There is ample evidence
that large majorities of Americans, for example, adopt a compromise
worldview in their attitudes towards political decisions14. However,
others adopt a ‘zero-sum worldview’ in which they prefer deadlock to
their party losing, that is, b < 0. The behaviour of people with a zerosum worldview is simple: they act as zealots, meaning that they always
vote for their preferred party regardless of the poll that they see. We
begin by focusing on players with a compromise worldview, and then
we study groups with a mixture of compromise and zero-sum players,
including zero-sum bots.
We first considered how a player updates their intended vote over
time as they integrate their partisan preference with noisy social information and the desire to avoid deadlock. We developed a simple mathematical model of voter behaviour based on calibration experiments
that varied the super-majority threshold V, the payoff ratio B/b, the
game duration and the poll size. In our model, a player expresses the
intention to vote for their assigned party according to a probability that
depends on the poll that they currently see and the time remaining in
the game. In particular, we consider a six-parameter strategy space in
which the voting probability of a player is conditioned on the state of
their current poll (whether it projects their preferred party to win, the
opposing party to win or deadlock) and the phase of the game (early
or late) (Fig. 1c).
The structure of the influence network has considerable, and surprising, effects on vote outcomes. In the simplest influence networks, every
player has an equal number of players from each party represented in
the polls that they see, so that the polls—although not identical—are
representative samples of the entire group (Fig. 2a–c). The decision
process on such a network is unbiased in the sense that the expected
vote share for each party is equal to the frequency of its membership in
the entire group. However, even when parties are equally matched in
influence and representation, bias can arise when the parties differ in
how their influence is assorted across the network (Fig. 2d). Even when
all players have the same amount of influence—that is, they are seen
by the same number of other players—the two parties can nonetheless
distribute their influence in more- or less-effective ways.
A party is most effective when it influences the largest possible
number of people just enough to flip their votes, without wasting
influence on those who are already convinced. The phenomenon of

1

Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA. 2Sloan School of Management, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. 3Environmental Change Institute, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. 4Center for Research and Teaching in Economics (CIDE), Aguascalientes, Mexico. 5Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
*e-mail: astewar6@central.uh.edu
5 S E P TE M B ER 2 0 1 9 | V O L 5 7 3 | N A T U RE | 1 1 7

RESEARCH Letter
b

Purple
win

B=2

b = 0.5

0

b = 0.5

1
V
1–V

Vote share

Deadlock

Yellow
win

a

0

0
1
V
1–V
0
1
V

B=2

1–V
Yellow
payoff

0

Purple
payoff

c

0

100
Time (s)

200

Probability of voting with team (yellow)
Early game

Late game

Pwin, early

Pwin, late

Poll projects
yellow win

Pdeadlock, early

Pdeadlock, late

Poll projects
deadlock

Plose, early

Plose, late

Poll projects
purple win

Proportion yellow in poll

1

V

1–V

0

t*

0

240

Time (s)

Fig. 1 | Strategies and payoffs in the voter game. Players are assigned
to either the purple or yellow party and allowed to change their voting
intention over time in response to continuously updated polling
information. a, The voting intentions recorded at the end of the game
(after 240 s) determine the payoffs to players. Players are incentivized
primarily to vote for their party (B > b), but also to coordinate with
the larger group to avoid deadlock (b > 0; compromise worldview).
b, Example time series of the overall vote share in three experiments,
which illustrate the yellow party winning a consensus (final vote share
exceeding V = 60%; top), neither party winning a consensus (deadlock;

middle) and the purple party winning a consensus (bottom). c, A simple
model of voter behaviour stipulates the probability a player will vote for
their preferred party (yellow, in this example) at time t, given which of
three possible outcomes is projected by the current polling information
and whether the game is in the early (t < t*) or late (t > t*) phase. This
six-parameter stochastic model of individual behaviour recapitulates the
typical time series (Supplementary Fig. 4) and vote outcomes (Fig. 3)
observed in experiments. b, c, Dashed lines indicate thresholds V = 60%
and 1 − V = 40%.

information gerrymandering arises when one party punches above
its weight by distributing its influence on a network so as to flip a
disproportionate number of persuadable voters. To understand how
a party can gain such an advantage, we adapt the principles of electoral gerrymandering—in which voting districts are drawn so that
one party wins a disproportionate number of seats15—to construct
influence networks in which one party has an advantage in persuading voters and the other party wastes much of its social influence
(Fig. 2d, Supplementary Information section 4 and Supplementary
Video 1).
To study information gerrymandering, we define the ‘influence
assortment’ of an influence network. Positive influence assortment
means that players are predominately exposed to the voting intentions
of members from their own party; negative influence assortment means
that players are predominately exposed to members of the opposing
party. To be precise, the influence assortment of player i is defined as

Information gerrymandering arises when parties have asymmetric
influence assortment. We quantify information gerrymandering as the
difference in assortment between a party P and its opposition, by defining the influence gap as



∆i
ai = 



− (1 − ∆ i )

if ∆ i ≥ 1/2
otherwise

(1)

in which ∆i denotes the proportion of the players who comprise the
poll visible to player i who are assigned to the same party as player i.
Notably, the influence assortment of a player depends in a nonlinear
way on the proportion of their influencers who share their party. This
definition is appropriate assuming players are strongly pulled towards
the majority view that they observe (Supplementary Information section 3). The overall assortment of the influence network, denoted A I,
is the average influence assortment of its nodes.
1 1 8 | N A T U RE | V O L 5 7 3 | 5 S E P TE M B ER 2 0 1 9

GI =

1
1
ai
∑ a i − N − |P| ∑
|P| i ∈ P ∩ H
i∈P c ∩ H

(2)

in which P are the nodes assigned to party P , H are human nodes
and N is the total number of nodes. Our model predicts that a party
with a positive influence gap will benefit from information gerrymandering.
To test this prediction, we conducted experiments with human subjects (n = 2,520) playing the voter game, in which we varied only the
structure of the influence network (Fig. 3). All games involved two parties of equal size (12 players each) with fixed payoffs (B = 2 and b = 0.5),
super-majority threshold (V = 60%) and duration (240 seconds) (for
full details of experiments and pre-registrations, see Supplementary
Information sections 1–3). In the baseline condition, each player sees a
poll that consists of three players from their own party and three players
from the opposing party, but the influence network is otherwise drawn
randomly. Under this condition of no influence assortment, each party
achieved a winning consensus in roughly one-quarter of experimental replicates; deadlock occurred in the remaining half of replicates
(Fig. 3a). The time-series data from this condition were used to infer the
probabilistic voting parameters of our behavioural model by maximum
likelihood (Supplementary Information section 2.2). The distribution
of inferred strategies is consistent with a Nash equilibrium for the voter

Letter RESEARCH

Experiment
Model
0.4

0
! = 0.0, ! = 0.0

c
Intermediate assortment

d

B

B B B B

d

0.4

e

B B

Complete assortment

Asymmetric assortment

Fig. 2 | Influence assortment and information gerrymandering.
a–d, The polling information available to a player in the voter game is
determined by their placement on a directed graph, called the influence
network. All of the example graphs here have nodes with identical
indegree and outdegree equal to three; and background colours indicate
the party with the majority of influence on each node (grey indicates no
majority). Each individual may be influenced predominantly by their own
party (positive influence assortment), predominately by the opposition
party (negative influence assortment) or evenly split between parties (no
influence assortment). a–c, When both parties have the same distribution
of influence assortment across their members, assortment is symmetric
and the decision outcome will be unbiased. d, An asymmetric distribution
of assortment can distort the flow of information so that, even when
all players have the same amount of influence, a majority of players are
influenced primarily by one party’s members—a phenomenon that we call
information gerrymandering.

game (Supplementary Information section 5), which includes a portion
of players who behave as zealots.
We used our behavioural model to predict the quantitative effects of
influence assortment and information gerrymandering on voting outcomes in four other experimental conditions. All treatments retained
the constraint that players have fixed and equal indegrees and outdegrees, and thus the same amount of influence. Our model predicts that
information gerrymandering will skew the final vote towards the party
with a positive influence gap (GI > 0) and that this party will achieve
a winning consensus more often than its opposition. Both of these predictions were validated experimentally (one-sided Wilcoxon signedrank test, P = 0.003 and one-sided binomial test, P = 0.02; Fig. 3b),
demonstrating that a party does indeed gain a considerable advantage
by information gerrymandering.
If one party benefits from information gerrymandering then, understanding this, the opposing party will naturally seek to do the same.
The party that has a disadvantage (GI < 0) can redress the imbalance
only by increasing the influence assortment of its members (equation (2)). But when both parties have equally high levels of influence
assortment (A I > 0 and GI = 0), neither party will have an advantage.
In fact, our model predicts that both parties will suffer from their
self-constructed echo chambers, resulting in deadlock more often than
in the case of no influence assortment. This prediction was also validated experimentally (one-sided t-test, t = 2.5, P = 0.006; Fig. 3),
demonstrating that increasing the influence assortment of your party—
although a rational response to information gerrymandering by your
opponent—decreases the rate of consensus and therefore decreases
payoffs for both parties.
Information gerrymandering by differential influence assortment
requires a degree of coordination among party members that may be
impractical in some settings. Another way to achieve the same advantage

0.4

! = 0.39, ! = 0.0

0
0.5
1.0
Vote share (yellow team)

0.8

B B

Frequency

B

0.8

0

0

0
0.5
1.0
Vote share (favoured team)

0.4

0
0
1.0
0.5
Vote share (favoured team)

! = 0.42, ! = 0.5

B

! = 0.5, ! = 0.52

0.8

Frequency

c

0
0.5
1.0
Vote share (yellow team)

0.8
Frequency

No assortment

b

0.8

Frequency

a

b

Frequency

a

0.4

B

! = 0.76, ! = 0.0

0

0
1.0
0.5
Vote share (yellow team)

Fig. 3 | Undemocratic outcomes and polarization in the voter game.
We conducted experimental voter games on human subjects (n = 2,560),
varying only the structure of the influence network. Each game involved
24 players, including any bots. a, We inferred the parameters of our
behavioural model (Fig. 1c) from experiments in a baseline condition:
networks with no influence assortment and no influence gap ( AI = 0 and
GI = 0). The model recapitulates the observed, bimodal distribution of
voting outcomes. b–e, We used the model to predict the distribution of
voting outcomes in 4 additional conditions each with ≥20 replicates
(model predictions are shown in grey and experimental results are overlaid
in light blue). b, Information gerrymandering (GI = 0.5) produced vote
shares as large as 67% for the more assorted party, which received a mean
vote share of 57% across experimental replicates, consistent with the model
prediction (Table 1). c, Asymmetric placement of 6 zealot bots also
favoured the party with a positive influence gap, resulting in vote shares as
large as 63% and a mean vote share of 53%. d, Symmetric influence
assortment gave neither party an advantage, and the frequency of a
consensus (15%) was markedly reduced compared to networks without
assortment (55%). e, Symmetrically placed bots gave neither party an
advantage and resulted in deadlock for all replicates. Dashed lines indicate
thresholds V = 60% and 1 − V = 40%. The party favoured by information
gerrymandering is depicted as yellow in the example graphs, but was in
fact assigned to yellow and purple evenly across experimental replicates.

is to encourage players to adopt a zero-sum worldview and act as zealots.
Or, in online interactions, bots can be deployed in place of actual human
zealots. In the context of the voter game, zealot bots always project the
intention to vote for their party regardless of the polls. Placed in strategic
locations, zealot bots can increase the influence assortment of their party
and decrease the influence assortment of the opposing party, generating
a positive influence gap. When one party’s zealot bots are so deployed
(GI > 0) , our model predicts that the vote will be skewed in its favour
and the party will win a consensus more often than its opposition. The
first of these predictions was validated experimentally (one-sided
Wilcoxon sign-rank test, P = 0.002; Fig. 3) and the second was not statistically significant (one-sided binomial test, P = 0.2; Fig. 3). Thus a
party receives some advantage from information gerrymandering by
zealot bots. However, if both parties seek to use bots in the same way,
then overall influence assortment increases, neither party receives an
advantage and deadlock occurs in all experimental replicates (Fig. 3e).
Collective decisions often involve more individuals, with greater
heterogeneity in influence, than used in our experiments. To study
information gerrymandering on complex networks, we simulated our
experimentally derived behavioural model on large influence networks
with long-tailed degree distributions (Supplementary Information section 6). Information gerrymandering arises easily in these networks,
and the influence gap GI continues to be predictive of the resulting vote
skew (Fig. 4a). Information gerrymandering induces vote skews that
5 S E P TE M B ER 2 0 1 9 | V O L 5 7 3 | N A T U RE | 1 1 9

RESEARCH Letter
Table 1 | Vote share and consensus
Vote share model

Vote share experiment

Consensus model

Consensus experiment

No assortment

0.50 (0.41–0.59)

0.48 (0.42–0.54)

0.63 (0.35–0.85)

0.55 (0.25–0.70)

Asymmetric assortment

0.60 (0.56–0.63)

0.57 (0.53–0.60)

0.47 (0.20–0.70)

0.45 (0.20–0.65)

Asymmetric bots

0.56 (0.54–0.59)

0.53 (0.51–0.55)

0.19 (0.05–0.33)

0.18 (0.03–0.28)

Symmetric assortment

0.50 (0.46–0.55)

0.51 (0.47–0.55)

0.18 (0–0.35)

0.15 (0–0.30)

Symmetric bots

0.50 (0.49–0.51)

0.50 (0.49–0.51)

0.01 (0–0.05)

0 (0)

Mean vote share and frequency of a winning consensus observed in experiments and predicted by the behavioural model, for the five experimental conditions shown in Fig. 3. Parentheses show 95%
confidence intervals derived by Efron bootstrap (experiments) or by Monte Carlo simulations (model).

are as large as 40% when two parties have equal size. Gerrymandering
can also reverse a 2:1 difference in party size, allowing the minority
party to win a majority of votes under our model (Fig. 4a).
To study groups with heterogeneous incentives, we simulated the
voter game on complex networks in which 20% of randomly placed
players hold a zero-sum worldview, resulting in 20% more zealots in
each game. Information gerrymandering continues to arise in this
setting, and the influence gap continues to predict vote outcomes
(Supplementary Figs. 12–14). Across diverse networks—in which party
representation ranged from 50:50 to 80:20—the influence gap accounts
for at least 40% of the variance in vote share under our behavioural
model (Supplementary Table 2).
Our results on the voter game raise the question of whether realworld collective decisions bear the hallmarks of information gerrymandering. To investigate this, we constructed networks from a variety
of empirical influence relationships, in which assortment may either
arise by strategic design or emerge spontaneously by self-assembly. We
measured influence relationships among lawmakers, using data on bill
co-sponsorship and among participants in online political discussions
(Supplementary Information section 7). We found significant differences (P < 0.01, t-test) in influence assortment between the governing and non-governing parties in six out of eight European legislative
bodies; and between Democrats and Republicans in online political
discussions preceding US federal elections (Fig. 4c). The influence gaps
observed in these diverse forms of political discourse are comparable in magnitude to those that induce large (>10%) vote skews in our
model and experiments. Influence gaps also occur in the networks of
bill co-sponsorship of the US Congress (Fig. 4b), which show a pattern
b

0.5

–2.0

–1.0
0
1.0
Influence gap ( )

2.0

0.5
0
–0.5

–2.0

–1.0
0
1.0
Influence gap ( )

2.0

|)

0
–1

US House
1975 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007

Year

1

0
–1

US Senate
1975 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007

Fig. 4 | Information gerrymandering on simulated influence networks
and empirical networks of political discourse. a, We simulated our
behavioural model of the voter game on 105 networks with power-law
degree distributions that reflect broad variation in individual influence.
The influence gap GI between two parties assigned randomly to nodes
correlates strongly with voting outcomes on these networks. Information
gerrymandering (GI > 0) induces large vote skews (top; equal-sized
parties), allowing even a minority party to win a majority of votes
(bottom; one party is twice as large). b, We constructed networks of
influence among lawmakers in the US Congress based on records of
bill co-sponsorship25 (Supplementary Information section 7). The
Democrats (blue) in the House and Senate exhibit consistent positive
influence assortment; whereas the Republicans (red) have historically been
1 2 0 | N A T U RE | V O L 5 7 3 | 5 S E P TE M B ER 2 0 1 9

Year

Absolute influence gap (|

)
0
–0.5

c

1

1.0
Influence assortment (

Vote skew

Vote skew

a

of increasing influence assortment over time, consistent with previous
accounts of increasing polarization in Congress based on established
metrics of political ideology16 (Supplementary Fig. 17).
Political polarization and echo chambers are the focus of intense
research and public discussion1–3,10. Unravelling the psychological mechanisms at play when people interact with different identity
groups17,18, opposing viewpoints19, hot-button topics such as climate
change20, fake or misleading news9, trusted versus distrusted sources21
and bots4,22 is vital for understanding decision making in real-world
settings. Furthermore, affective polarization10—negative attitudes to
members of the other party, rather than to specific policies—is of great
importance as it may cause people to adopt a zero-sum worldview.
Nevertheless, our study on the voter game highlights how sensitive
collective decisions are to information gerrymandering on an influence
network, how easily gerrymandering can arise in realistic networks
and how widespread it is in real-world networks of political discourse
and legislative process. Our analysis provides a new perspective and a
quantitative measure to study public discourse and collective decisions
across diverse contexts.
Central to this perspective is the understanding that influence assortment presents a group-level social dilemma23. Symmetric influence
assortment allows for democratic outcomes, in which the expected vote
share of a party is equal to its representation among voters; and low
influence assortment allows decisions to be reached with broad consensus despite different partisan goals. A party that increases its own
influence assortment relative to that of the other party by coordination,
strategic use of bots or encouraging a zero-sum worldview benefits
from information gerrymandering and wins a disproportionate share

0.8

Romania UC
(2012–16)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

Romania LC
(2012–16)
Political Twitter
(2010)

Italy UC
(2013–18)

France LC
(2012–17)

Czech LC
Italy LC
Political news (2013–17)
(2013–18)
(2016)
Political blogs
France UC
Czech UC
(2004)
(2012–17)
(2013–17)

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Influence assortment ( )

1.0

less assorted, suffering from a negative influence gap. Starting in 1994,
Republican influence assortment increased considerably and has since
remained nearly as high as among Democrats, consistent with increased
polarization16 in Congress since the mid-1990s. c, We analysed bill
co-sponsorship in the upper (UC; light green) and lower (LC; dark green)
chambers of the Czech, French, Italian and Romanian legislatures during
their most recent sessions26. We observe significant influence gaps in all
except the Czech and French upper chambers (Supplementary Table 5).
We analysed datasets of online political discussion27–29 (black) during the
2004, 2010 and 2016 US elections. We observe a significant Republicanleaning influence gap in the 2004 blog network and in the 2010 Twittermention network and a significant Democratic-leaning influence gap in
the 2016 news intake network (Supplementary Information section 7).

Letter RESEARCH
of the vote—that is, an undemocratic outcome. However, other parties
are then incentivized to increase their own influence assortment, which
leaves everyone trapped in deadlock.
This dilemma is reminiscent of the two-player Prisoner’s Dilemma.
Although mutual defection is the only Nash equilibrium for two individuals, a large literature has established mechanisms to avoid defection
in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, such as reciprocity, punishment and reputation24. Future research must seek to resolve the group-level dilemma
that arises from the presence of information gerrymandering in collective decisions.

Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Data availability

All data necessary to reproduce the results are available at https://github.com/
jplotkin/InformationGerrymandering.

Code availability

All scripts necessary to reproduce the results are available at https://github.com/
jplotkin/InformationGerrymandering.

Online content

Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source
data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review
information; and details of author contributions and competing interests are available
at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1507-6.

Received: 12 November 2018; Accepted: 30 July 2019;
Published online 4 September 2019.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Barberá, P., Jost, J. T., Nagler, J., Tucker, J. A. & Bonneau, R. Tweeting from left to
right: is online political communication more than an echo chamber? Psychol.
Sci. 26, 1531–1542 (2015).
Del Vicario, M. et al. The spreading of misinformation online. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 113, 554–559 (2016).
Bakshy, E., Messing, S. & Adamic, L. A. Exposure to ideologically diverse news
and opinion on Facebook. Science 348, 1130–1132 (2015).
Woolley, S. C. Automating power: social bot interference in global politics. First
Monday 21, 4 (2016).
Lazer, D. M. J. et al. The science of fake news. Science 359, 1094–1096 (2018).
Vosoughi, S., Roy, D. & Aral, S. The spread of true and false news online. Science
359, 1146–1151 (2018).
Matz, S. C., Kosinski, M., Nave, G. & Stillwell, D. J. Psychological targeting as an
effective approach to digital mass persuasion. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,
12714–12719 (2017).

8.

Bond, R. M. et al. A 61-million-person experiment in social influence and
political mobilization. Nature 489, 295–298 (2012).
9. Pennycook, G. & Rand, D. G. Lazy, not biased: susceptibility to partisan fake
news is better explained by lack of reasoning than by motivated reasoning.
Cognition 188, 39–50 (2019).
10. Iyengar, S., Sood, G. & Lelkes, Y. Affect, not ideology: a social identity perspective
on polarization. Public Opin. Q. 76, 405–431 (2012).
11. Crockett, M. J. Moral outrage in the digital age. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 769–771
(2017).
12. Kearns, M., Judd, S., Tan, J. & Wortman, J. Behavioral experiments on biased
voting in networks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1347–1352 (2009).
13. Couzin, I. D. et al. Uninformed individuals promote democratic consensus in
animal groups. Science 334, 1578–1580 (2011).
14. Newport, F. Americans favor compromise to get things done in Washington.
Gallup https://news.gallup.com/poll/220265/americans-favor-compromisethings-done-washington.aspx (2017).
15. Stephanopoulos, N. O. & McGhee, E. Partisan gerrymandering and the
efficiency gap. Univ. Chic. Law Rev. 82, 831–900 (2015).
16. Lewis, J. B. & Poole, K. T. Measuring bias and uncertainty in ideal point
estimates via the parametric bootstrap. Polit. Anal. 12, 105–127 (2004).
17. Guilbeault, D., Becker, J. & Centola, D. Social learning and partisan bias in the
interpretation of climate trends. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 9714–9719 (2018).
18. Gavrilets, S. & Richerson, P. J. Collective action and the evolution of social norm
internalization. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 6068–6073 (2017).
19. Bail, C. A. et al. Exposure to opposing views on social media can increase
political polarization. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 9216–9221 (2018).
20. Weber, E. U. & Stern, P. C. Public understanding of climate change in the United
States. Am. Psychol. 66, 315–328 (2011).
21. Pennycook, G. & Rand, D. G. Fighting misinformation on social media using
crowdsourced judgments of news source quality. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116,
2521–2526 (2019).
22. Shirado, H. & Christakis, N. A. Locally noisy autonomous agents improve global
human coordination in network experiments. Nature 545, 370–374 (2017).
23. Hardin, G. The tragedy of the commons. The population problem has no
technical solution; it requires a fundamental extension in morality. Science 162,
1243–1248 (1968).
24. Rand, D. G. & Nowak, M. A. Human cooperation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 413–425
(2013).
25. Fowler, J. H. Legislative cosponsorship networks in the US House and Senate.
Soc. Networks 28, 454–465 (2006).
26. Briatte, F. Network patterns of legislative collaboration in twenty parliaments.
Netw. Sci. 4, 266–271 (2016).
27. Adamic, L. A. & Glance, N. The political blogosphere and the 2004 U.S. election:
divided they blog. In Proc. 3rd International Workshop on Link Discovery 36–43
(ACM, 2005).
28. Conover, M. et al. Political polarization on Twitter. In ICWSM 89–96 (2011).
29. Faris, R. et al. Partisanship, Propaganda, and Disinformation: Online Media
and the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election. Berkman Klein Center Research
Publication 2017-6 https://ssrn.com/abstract=3019414 (2017).
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2019

5 S E P TE M B ER 2 0 1 9 | V O L 5 7 3 | N A T U RE | 1 2 1

RESEARCH Letter
Acknowledgements We acknowledge funding from the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency NGS2 program (grant D17AC00005; to A.J.S., J.B.P.,
M.M., A.A.A. and D.G.R.), the Ethics and Governance of Artificial Intelligence
Initiative of the Miami Foundation (to D.G.R.), the Templeton World Charity
Foundation and the John Templeton Foundation (to D.G.R.), the Army Research
Office (grant W911NF-17-1-0083; to J.B.P.) and the David & Lucile Packard
Foundation (to J.B.P.). The views, opinions, and findings expressed are those of
the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official views or
policies of the Department of Defense or the US Government.
Author contributions A.J.S., D.G.R., M.D. and J.B.P. conceived the project. A.J.S.,
D.G.R., M.D. and J.B.P. developed the model. A.J.S. ran the simulations with input
from J.B.P. and D.G.R. A.J.S., M.M., D.G.R. and J.B.P. designed the experiments.
M.M. and A.A.A. ran the experiments. A.J.S., M.M. and J.B.P. analysed the

experimental data with input from D.G.R. and A.A.A. A.J.S. analysed the
empirical networks with input from D.G.R. and J.B.P. A.J.S. and J.B.P. wrote
the paper with input from D.G.R., M.M., A.A.A. and M.D.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41586-019-1507-6.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.J.S.
Peer review information Nature thanks Carl T. Bergstrom, Wei Chen and Brian
Uzzi for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints.

Last updated by author(s): 2019-7-3

Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.

Statistics

nature research | reporting summary

Corresponding author(s): Alexander Stewart

For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.

A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.

For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.

Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection

Breadboard (https://github.com/human-nature-lab/breadboard) was used to code Mturk experiments. All other data was from published
literature

Data analysis

Matlab and R were used for data analysis. All analysis scripts are provided.

For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.

Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
October 2018

Experimental data is included with the Supplementary Information
Publicly available datasets are available at the following locations:
Senate and House co-sponsorship data - http://jhfowler.ucsd.edu/cosponsorship.htm
European legislatures bill co-sponsorship data - https://f.briatte.org/parlviz/
Political blog data - available as supplement to Adamic, L. A. & Glance, N. The political blogosphere and the 2004 us election: divided they blog. In Proceedings of
the 3rd international workshop on Link discovery, 36–43 (ACM, 2005)
Political Twitter data - available as supplement to Conover, M.et al. Political polarization on twitter. In ICWSM
Political news consumption - Available as supplement to Faris, R.et al.Partisanship, propaganda, and disinformation: Online media and the 2016 US
presidential election. Berkman Klein Center Research Publication 2017-6

1

Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences

Behavioural & social sciences

Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences

For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf

Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description

We study a "Voter Coordination Game" in which a pool of N=24 players continuously update their voting intention from which we
generate "polls" leading up to a final "vote", in which they must choose between two "parties" (purple, P, and yellow, Y). Each voter is
assigned an intrinsic preference for one or the other party, such that they receive a higher payoff if that party "wins" the vote by
receiving a "supermajority" of V votes, relative to if the other party wins the supermajority. If neither party receives a supermajority,
however, no players receive any payoff. Thus players have two potentially conflicting shared goals - achieving their individual preference
(having their party achieve a supermajority) and reaching successful coordination across the population (having either party achieve a
supermajority)

Research sample

We recruited at a total of 2,520 unique subjects from Amazon Mechanical Turk, over the course of 120 experimental sessions in total.
Once joining a session, subjects were randomly assigned to one of the two teams (purple or yellow), and were asked to take a tutorial,
followed by four multiple-choice questions about the game rules and the payment structure (the questions were the same across
conditions, to avoid potential selection issues). Those who could not provide a correct answer to all questions were not allowed to
continue to the game.

Sampling strategy

Sample sizes were calculated based on pilot experiments. Monte Carlo simulations were performed using inferred strategies and number
of replicates were determined based on our simulated power to detect differences in vote outcome. Once data collection began we
increased our sample size and updated our pre-registration (included as supplement) to account for lower than expected rates of vote
consensus in one condition.

Data collection

Participants were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk), paying $1 show-up with the opportunity to earn additional bonus
based on the outcome of the game. MTurk workers with MTurk approval ratings of greater than 85% were eligible.

Timing

Data was collected between March 13th 2018 and March 22nd 2018

Data exclusions

No data was excluded

Non-participation

No participants dropped out

Randomization

Each participant was randomly assigned to a "party" (pruple or yellow) and to a position on the voting network

nature research | reporting summary

Figure 3 and Figure 4 are associated with raw data.
Simulation data and simulation code are available as supplements to this paper

Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.

Materials & experimental systems

Methods

n/a Involved in the study

n/a Involved in the study

Antibodies

ChIP-seq

Eukaryotic cell lines

Flow cytometry

Palaeontology

MRI-based neuroimaging

Animals and other organisms

Clinical data

Human research participants

October 2018

Human research participants

Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics

See above

2

Participants were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk), paying $1 show-up with the opportunity to earn additional
bonus based on the outcome of the game. MTurk workers with MTurk approval ratings of greater than 85% were eligible.

Ethics oversight

The human-subject research was approved by the Yale University Committee of the Use of Human Subjects IRB protocol
#1307012383

Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.

nature research | reporting summary

Recruitment

October 2018

3

