These subtitles have been generated automatically
So, two weeks ago, we got into kind of economically and financially motivated blockchain cryptocurrency
topics, then we switched more to the back
toward the kind of experimental democracy
side with liquid democracy.
This week, we'll flip back to the more
economically motivated topics.
So, let's look at a few interesting experimental,
let's say, technologies or practices that
really come out of economics to varying degrees
of experimental interest.
The first is really kind of mainstream.
I didn't assign a reading on it.
There are optional readings on it, but you're
probably familiar with it already, which is...
So we're going to look at economic market
mechanisms that try to get some kind of social
good out of economics in different ways, right?
So the first that you're probably already familiar
with is crowdfunding.
So how many of you have participated in
crowdfunding schemes out of curiosity?
Donated?
Great.
Any of you run one?
Propose something?
Okay.
Yeah.
That idea, it's been out a while and
it's really kind of gone mainstream.
I think probably most people are at least
aware of them and a lot of useful products have been crowdfunded.
Next, so the two assigned readings are about
slightly more niche topics that not everybody knows about.
One is prediction markets.
So how many of you have heard about
these out of curiosity?
I know, yeah, you mentioned it.
Yeah.
Good.
And then even more recent experimental and experimental
quadratic voting.
So I think there's also a quadratic funding
that's kind of a variation on crowdsourcing, but I wasn't planning to cover that.
Any of you heard of quadratic voting before?
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
So I think these are all certainly interesting
ideas worth studying, worth looking at and being aware of.
As usual, as in everything we look at
in this course, there are there are attractions, appeals and some risks and downsides and we want to look at all of those.
Right.
So let's start with, let's start with crowdfunding.
Hopefully you're all familiar with the basic idea.
Right.
There's many.
It usually happens on various online, online platforms.
And then there's a lot of different types
of events on which basically you, if you're a small group of people that thinks, well, you know, this, this idea, this product, this thing that, you know, wouldn't would be really nice to have.
Well, write it up, write out a plan,
a proposal.
A plan for how, you know, how you
the group of people is going to, going to implement it, you know, maybe a first, first cut proof of concept if you have it, things like that.
And then it's kind of an advertising and
see if well, will the community buy into it with donations, contribute contributions.
You know, sometimes.
Sometimes they're just donations and they're, they don't
technically promise anything.
Right.
Or, in other cases, well, you're promised, you
know, some reward like, like an early version of, you know, if it's crowdfunded board game, maybe you get, you know, a early, you know, a version of the board game or other, the other product, right.
Or, or special, special returns, rewards.
For, for the investors, right. So sometimes there's
something promise something not right.
But it's really writing on, you know, community
interest. I do do people like the idea do they want this are they willing to put their money or their mouth is and fork over a little bit.
Even if it's not a lot if a
lot of people get interested. Still, it can, it can very quickly fund impressive projects.
So, um, yeah, so what's your experience if
you have any with crowdfunding campaigns or platforms out of curiosity, any, any relevant experience.
Thoughts about the basic idea so far.
You like the idea, not so great.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
A lot of what scams yeah okay.
Let's start the actually.
I'm going to start the issues.
And risks on the next page because we
will need room for it. Right. So indeed, yeah, scams outright scams can be a significant problem. Right.
You know, in principle, in many of these
platforms you can post whatever yeah I'm going to, you know, create an alien spaceship. But actually I'm just going to run away with all the money.
Right.
It's, it actually is kind of surprising how
not to car. Yeah, there are a lot of scams. But it's kind of surprising, you know, how not that common the scams are given that, you know, most mostly it's just totally totally trust right.
And so no reason, you know, in a
way, you know, if everybody was a pure rational economic actor like the economists like to think of them, they should all be scams right because what's what's holding, you know, any of these people
should do what they promised. Right. Well, sometimes
there are small incentives but yes.
Yeah.
Mm hmm.
Yeah. Yeah, so they, you know, usually are
not required to be that open. You know, sometimes they are voluntary but yeah.
And it was.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Exactly. Yeah. Whoever's running the project, they decide
how it's run the pace.
You know,
Yeah.
Yeah, you're right. Yeah, even if they're very
well intentioned, maybe, you know, if the crowd, if the project is way more popular than they expected, and they're well intended and they really want to carry carry out, but then they're under this huge pressure to do that and like you suggest like, you know, we feel like they can't have a life anymore, you know, that can be a problem for the
project for the actual funded project to sell.
Yeah.
Pressure.
You know, work life balance for the actual
funded project.
These, these can certainly be issues.
Yeah. On the other hand, you know, like
I said, many of them are not scarce, many of these projects are legit people who really want to, you know, and intend to and often do carry through right which is which is nice.
So it's, you know, based on trust and
sometimes that trust is reasonably well placed.
So, yeah, well, let's come back to the
issues and risks more. What are some of the.
So, you know, this is the basic basic
idea what are some of the attractions what is it. What is crowdfunding good for.
Right.
Why do we want it why do why
might we need it.
Right. Yeah.
More than what.
Yeah.
Yeah, projects that have a that kind of
cater to a certain very small, you know, but present user population and probably aren't going to attract any kind of mainstream funding because yeah, it's just too niche.
There are no, no regular investor in their
right mind is going to is going to take this on because it's only this, you know, crazy little group of geeks that interested in this particular idea that it's, you know, ever going to be interested or even understand what's going on.
Right. So yeah, it can, it can be
successful.
But actually crowd.
It's it's not only so it's useful for
that but it's not only useful for niche projects either.
What if yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, good.
So, let's say, sidelined minorities.
Who have and and any kind of communities.
This can be local communities to sometimes.
You know, sometimes do can and do use
crowdfunding platforms that have been kind of ignored by by the larger societies they live in by their governments whatnot.
Crowdfunding platforms have been used to fix local
potholes that the government is just not like, you know, people are complaining and complaining and complaining this segment of road is dangerous.
The potholes are terrible. The government will not
fix it. Okay, let's, you know, start a crowdfunding campaign pull together the funds to fix those potholes make make it more safe. This has happened. Right. Yes.
even crowd-funded political campaigns.
And it can be used as a form
of, as a funding source, in a form of, I think,
as you kind of suggested, opposition or protest,
right?
So it can be, it can be, and
sometimes is used as a very political thing.
Yeah, exactly. Radio, art, projects, things like that.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Good. Very good. Yeah, so these
are all, you know, great examples of cases where, yeah, crowdfunding can be an often is
successful in practice and some, and, you know,
sometimes works. Good.
Back to issues.
What is crowdfunding, what might crowdfunding not be
so good for? What else might go wrong? Yes.
The problem is should be.
Ah, yeah. Great point. If this is fixing
those, those thought holes was supposed to be the government's job.
We're gathering local community funds to do the
government's job for them. The government said, oh, thank you, problem solved, we'll move on and continue ignoring you maybe even more than before.
Right. So in that sense, yeah, you know,
it might be truly, you know, kind of, you know, antithetical to the bigger, to do anything about the bigger problem, right? Yes.
That makes David a lot of money.
Yeah, it basically makes every makes arbitrary choices
in, you know, kind of an objectively kind of unfair way, just whoever, whoever is loudest and does the does the best
best job of writing the crowdfunding campaign.
And yeah, exactly.
So, yeah, so these two, yeah,
these are two very good points.
So one is, you know,
so it might replace
or,
or,
well, let's just say,
so do government's job
and reduce pressure that should be there
for the government to do its own job,
right?
And then, yeah, so crowdfunding,
the success of crowdfunding campaigns,
who wins, who loses can be very arbitrary,
right?
And popularity-based, right?
Or appearance-based, right?
Is it really the most deserving projects
that are getting all the attention
or is it just the most flashy, though?
Or the ones that just get lucky, right?
Yeah.
Now, here's it, coming back to the,
kind of the issue of interaction with government,
especially if we consider crowdfunding campaigns
that are mostly of interest to particular neighborhoods,
have some locality, right?
Maybe it's about doing something in a particular
neighborhood,
physical or geographic neighborhood,
or a certain demographic,
which they quite commonly are.
Of course, there's gonna be rich neighborhoods
and there's gonna be poor neighborhoods, right?
You look at crowdfunding campaigns
that appeal to rich neighborhoods
and similar crowdfunding campaigns
that appeal to poor neighborhoods,
independent of how interesting or deserving
or well-designed the project is,
we're gonna see disparities, right?
In a way, so coming from the US,
fortunately, this is less of a problem in
Switzerland,
but in the US, the education system,
just primary education system,
is extremely neighborhood-centric, right?
So local governments basically are expected
to pay the costs of primary education.
Of course, there are rich neighborhoods
and there are poor neighborhoods,
and the quality of the primary education
in a given neighborhood is absolutely
a function of how rich, poor,
or somewhere in between your neighborhood happens to
be, right?
So rich neighborhoods, well, they call for
basically crowdfunding donations from their,
kind of rich, no local neighborhoods all the
time.
They get a lot of money, they do
a lot of great things,
they get the latest computers in their computer
room,
the latest classes with better paid teachers
and all this stuff, poor neighborhoods do not
have that,
right?
So in a sense,
and any mechanism like that,
so you could say that just primary education
in the US,
I don't know how prevalent this is in
some other countries,
but hopefully not too prevalent in Europe,
but it's kind of a crowdfunding-based solution,
and it at the very least completely fails
to do anything about disparities of wealth
and maybe further accentuates it, right?
So that's,
so let's see,
so the amount, kind of the success
and the funding available depends highly
on basically the wealth
of the interested audience, right?
The target audience, yeah.
Mm-hmm
Small small pockets and communities that just don't
have the critical mass or funding to keep
To maintaining their culture
That's the same as me
Yep, exactly. Mm-hmm. Yeah, so so this is
Yeah, so great great points. So exactly so
so we
So I you know, there's there's something that
is you know, very appealing and works for certain things and
you know in in crowdfunding, but it's also
important to
You know consider that, you know, kind of
in this bigger picture
Who does it work for and by what
distribution and is that you know
Is that the right distribution or or not?
Does it does it help improve societies? You know
Or does it make make some problems worth
such as such as
wealth disparities culture disparities like linguistic disparity like
educational disparities, right?
so
yeah, these are
uh, you know important questions and you know
some crowding crowdfunding projects, of course are
You know very broad like, you know broad
in terms of targeting kind of people geographically all over for for different
types of people, right?
But some might not be right. So it's
it's
uh
Yeah, these are important issues any other so
other other issues or
benefits or risks to think about
any other other thoughts on
crowdfunding
yes
whereas all these other maybe more deserving projects
are getting no attention.
Yeah, so it's, yeah.
So these are important issues to take account
of,
but before we consider relying on this kind
of mechanism
too deeply or too pervasively, I would say.
Good.
Okay, so I wanna cover a couple others
though,
but so first of all,
let's talk a little bit about prediction markets.
So you'll read an assigned, well, hopefully you
read
the assigned paper on this,
but so what's the basic idea?
It's, you know, what's the one sentence?
Yep, exactly.
Future not yet predicted outcomes of future events,
such as, you know, elections.
Like who's going to win this election in
the future
is kind of the quintessential example, right?
Good.
So of course, you know,
this sounds pretty similar to gambling, right?
Predict on this particular horse to win this
future race,
right?
So what's the difference?
Of course, you know, the economist,
Great. Yeah, yeah. So can we, you know,
to to throw around, yeah, so so the the the public.
Or the market.
Sets the price dynamically basically finds the price.
And in print in principle this reveals information.
Which arguably might be useful, right? It's a
social good to have more better information, right? Yeah.
So are you bringing this up as a
risk or risk or as or as a justification like I like it's meaningful like it's like, yeah, so which horse wins isn't going to isn't going to make anybody's life better for sure.
But which candidate wins might actually change things
and and you know getting more people to put their money where their mouth is and and you know get the right candidate to win may and maybe you know revealing good information about about that in the process might be a good thing.
Good. Good. Yeah. So, can we can we
call it call this, you know, to be a little bit dangerously sloppy gambling for good.
So I'm not I'm not sure if I
totally agree with that but that's you know one way to one way to see this. Yeah, you know we're trying to trying to get good information about, you know, about events, possible future events that actually affect people's lives and so this is this is important it's not just betting on horses racing.
Yeah. Good.
Now,
we clear on it. I haven't really covered
exactly how it works. Right. So of course the article talks a little bit about it.
But I mean the concept is super simple
right if if I think if I think candidate Bob is going to win the election with three quarters probability with 35% chance.
And you know maybe I'm willing to bet
with someone who thinks the probability is lower and if somebody offer so so I would be willing to buy a share or token or on that candidate winning that will that will, you know, say, pay a dollar if the candidate wins and pay,
zero if the candidate or pay one, you
know, one Frank if the candidate wins pay zero if the candidate loses. If I think the candidate is 75% likely to win, then my expected, you know, return on that token would be 75 statistically 75 cents, right.
So if I can buy one of these
tokens for less than 75 cents like if somebody else thinks that the candidate is only 60% or 50% likely to win and is willing to sell me one of these tokens at 50 or 60% then I should be economically willing to buy it for, you know, for for 50 or 60% expecting
you know, in expectation, I'm gonna, you know,
with 1520% probability, I'm going to make I'm going to make money right in expectation right.
Similarly somebody who's you know betting against will
think you know say okay the price is too high I think it should be lower.
You know, I'll sell I'll be on the
other side sell one or or buy the the complimentary token that says, well this pays if you know one if the candidate loses and zero if the candidate went right so you create these in pairs basically and and
you know one and then when the outcome
is actually determined one is worth one the other is worth zero right.
Yeah, so is it reasonably clear how how
it actually works. Yeah, and then and then yeah how the how the market set prices well you know people people offer to buy and sell just like on a stock exchange right if, if I think the price, you know, if I think the current
price is going to be too low, well
maybe I'll I can make a profit by buying, you know, I'm, you know, one side of this deal. If a lot of people think that they'll raise the price to a certain equilibrium.
If people are, you know, think the price
is too high meaning that you know Canada is less likely to win than the current price indicates well you can, you can sell that will you know collectively prove push the price down.
So we're using the market to create and
reveal information. Right.
And sometimes these, they've actually worked surprisingly well
there's been studies that that show that you know in some cases the predictions that come out of prediction markets do a better job than the expert predictors of various kinds.
So, yeah, not always but but sometimes.
So, what do you think about the idea
so benefits. So there, there's the appeal that kind of the public good, the information good appeal. What are some issues and risks you can think of.
And many, yeah, one one form of manipulation
that can and and I think sometimes does happen. Yeah, exactly. So you want to basically you have money, you're willing to spend it to create a perception that yeah this candidate is totally going to win right,
because well you want to, you know, you,
you want the candidate to win, and you're trying to, you know, basically perform a form of astro turfing, you know, spend money to create a perception that there's a groundswell of support for this candidate everybody thinks this candidate is going to win when in fact it's only you the whale that
wants the candidate to win.
You know, and is creating a, you know,
manipulating the market to create a an actually in inaccurate perception.
And maybe you win, maybe, you know, if
you succeed in manipulating the perception, you can be, you can create a self fulfilling profit prophecy, right. So the end this is you know kind of the whole idea this might be the whole idea right.
So without your manipulation, candidate never would have
even been on the radar, let alone winning but because well, you know, this blip created by the whales investment got got that dark we call this a dark horse candidate right got it on the news cycle speaking of
the news cycles, the journalists notice, hey, nobody
heard about this. Hey, let's write a, let's write some articles on it, and then it gets goes kaboom right you know goes viral, and suddenly this you know completely non serious candidate is serious candidate and yeah you know self fulfilling
policies can be a self fulfilling indeed.
Of course, you know it's hard to predict
of when that'll happen but it can certainly happen.
Yeah, what else.
Very good point.
So, the prevalence of, let's say, good or
useful information.
Even in theory, even in the prediction market
theory prediction markets are really only useful when for for situations where there's quite a bit of diffuse information, the way you know a lot of people have at least a little bit of good information.
That doesn't always happen.
Yeah.
even if you're not deliberately trying to manipulate
the thing, if it just turns out that,
you know, kind of the, you know, there's
a core strong correlation that, you know,
kind of more wealthy people tend to prefer
one outcome and less wealthy people tend to,
tend to prefer the other, then well, for
the wealthy people, this is, this is pocket change,
for the not so wealthy people, this is
real money. And that can, you know, just, you know,
without anybody even intending to do anything wrong
can, can be effective manipulation,
drive the price in that direction, you know,
irrespective of what the, you know,
kind of independent probabilities of winning might be.
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So
there's for sure a lot of legal issues.
Yeah. Like, is this actually legal? Under what
conditions? For whom? Who, you know,
is it gambling? Is it voting? Is it
neither? Is it both? And to my knowledge, that hasn't been
figured out definitively. Yeah. You know, it's, it's
one of these gray areas where I, you know,
as far as I know, the lawyers don't
even want to touch, touch it if possible, right? Keep it
offshore, right? Yes. Ah, good, good. Yes. Yeah.
So loosely, that might fall under manipulation,
but it's a very important, exactly. Mm hmm.
Exactly. So it's in, when you're, when you actually
know something, like, for example, you know, the
candidate is, is actually soon going to,
going to end the candidacy, right? Close the
race because they decided, you know,
something else came up or, or, you know,
you know, you know something that most people don't,
it's not diffuse information, it's special privileged information
that only you have.
Well, there's, you know, even, even, yeah, in
financial markets, it would be, you know, highly
prohibited to use that in this kind of
market where, well, it's a big legal, uncertain legal
mess. Well, is it strictly prohibited? What are
the risks? Is it, or, you know, and certainly
there's going to be the temptation to use
that special information if you, if you happen to have
it, right? So for sure. Good. Yes. Sorry,
speak up a little bit more.
Using it as a form of lobbying. Yeah.
So like in the kind of in the manipulation
category using it,
Yeah, so it might be a way to
push candidates in unconventional, use money to push candidates
into a more open market.
So, indeed, there's a lot of ways that
this could be, could go wrong, could be misused.
Yeah, and as far as I know, it's
still very much kind of an open issue.
Well, you know, are our prediction markets a
good thing or a bad thing?
Are they a potentially good thing but risky?
Yeah, I think they should be allowed in
some particular legal framework or not.
Yeah.
Ah, yeah, yeah, good point.
So there has to be a definitive official
source that, and if that's open to controversy, that can be a big problem.
Like some, you know, crowd A thinks the
outcome was this and crowd B thinks the outcome was that.
Have you seen this happen? Has this happened
in?
Okay, yeah, yeah, I see. Yeah, yeah, so,
good point. So that can certainly be bad.
Now, let me just make a little bit
more room.
So, this is an outcome disagreement, right?
And so this is, and in fact, this
particular problem is absolutely isomorphic to a well-known problem in the whole blockchain cryptocurrency space that I briefly alluded to when we were talking about, remember when we were talking about smart contracts,
the blockchain execution has to be deterministic. It
can use information on the blockchain, but it can't get or use directly use external world information, like what the newspapers say about which candidate won, right?
And so you could totally write a prediction
market smart contract, but you can't reliably get the input. Somebody has to attest on the blockchain based on somebody say so that, well, this candidate actually won or lost, right?
And that's something that, well, you know, that's
going to be a single point of failure and there might be disagreement about that and it can create exactly the same problems and create, you know, two communities that say, hey, that's not what happened.
Hey, you owe me this money, right? And
entire blockchains have been forked over this. These kinds of disagreements in the past too. So, yeah, so, yeah, it's a, that can be a real problem.
Okay, good. So it's break time. So let's
good, good time to take the break. Let's come back at 415 and we'll talk about, about quadratic voting.
Okay.
So,
let's talk about this very interesting idea called
quadratic voting.
So can you, can anyone briefly summarize the
main idea from reading it in the paper or if you've seen the idea before, what's, what's the basic idea?
Good. So you have some number of credits.
If you want to do this in a, if you want to
apply this in a more egalitarian democratic fashion,
you might say, okay, everybody has
10 credits or 100 credits, the equal amount
for this vote. And then you spend them while
you're casting votes. There are variants of quadratic
voting applications where they
envision actually using real money and that's where,
where it would not be, you know, egalitarian
to start with in that regard. But, you
know, it can be used, it's a concept that can be
used in different ways. But the key, of
course, where the quadratic comes in, as you, as you
said, you can, you can vote either for
or against options typically, but to, to, you
can cast positive or negative votes. To cast
and vote, you have to spend n squared credits.
And in a given, it's, it's kind of
assumed that in a given voting, you know, situation,
there might be a number of our orthogonal
choices, elections, candidates options or things like this.
So it's kind of a, you know, different
races, different options, like so candidate or race
or questions, A, B, C, D, E, right?
So these might be different candidates, you know, Alice,
Bob, Charlie, you know, or we're trying to
decide between, or they might be different, yes, no
questions on a for direct democracy, like, you
know, and completely different questions.
Question A is a yes or no question
about healthcare and B is a yes or no question about
some economic policy and C is, you know,
something totally different, right? So there can be,
you know, a number of potentially very different
related or unrelated questions,
candidates or, you know, topics on the ballot.
And each voter, well, you have your bag,
I'm a terrible artist, sorry. So this is
your bag of 100 credits or however many, you know,
each voter gets, right? And you decide how
to, how to use those, these credits to either upvote
or downvote, cast upvotes or downvotes on any
of particular these questions or issues, right?
So if you, let's say if you care
a lot about candidate B, so you, you know, or question B,
you, you, you completely, you, you don't care
at all about the other questions on the ballot,
but you really want, let's say, let's say
these are yes, no questions, just to keep being simple,
you really care about candidate, about question B,
and you totally don't care at all about
the other questions. And everybody has 100 credits.
How do you vote?
So you're gonna, you're gonna use, you're gonna
use all 100 credits to cast
10 votes, right? So pretend that's 10, it's
not, sorry. Okay. So, you know, 100
credits casts, you know, is good to cast
10 votes for question, for question B, for example,
or against question B, if you want to
have a big influence against question B, right?
So that's, that's one thing you could do
with your 100 credits, right? Another thing you could do
is, you know, divide it in two or
divide it in four. And if you spread it out more, then,
so if you, if you, for example, you
know, kind of in the other case, if you, if there are a lot of
questions, right, you could, you know, cast one
credit each on 100 different
credits, and you would be casting 100 votes
total, right? So your voting power basically,
you know, when you, you're, you're essentially rewarded,
you know, you get additional voting
power if you spread out, you know, your
vote because of this quadratic rule. On the other hand,
you can, you know, concentrate on one, you
know, on one or just a few things that you care most
about, but your voting, your effective voting power
is going to be attenuated when you do that, right?
So,
so voting power is, is attenuated is smaller
if you concentrate it.
You're,
you get more total effective voting power if
it's spread out, right? So that's kind of the intuition.
Now, why would we want this sounds weird,
right?
Why, what's the argument that this might be
a good thing? And why N squared in particular,
you know, there's a lot of choices of
potential powers, N to the one is another, right? Just N,
right? You know, 100 credits, divide them however
you want, that's a, that's a four, you know, and
then you get that many votes in each,
each place, right? That's actually a form of voting that,
you know, gets used. I think it's sometimes
called cumulative, cumulative voting just
to emulate number of votes, simple, simple linear,
linear rule. But you could choose
N to the Q and cubes could choose
N to the 1.5 or 2.5, why N squared? Yes.
Yeah, so there's an argument that this is
kind of a sweet spot between attenuating
concentrated votes, somewhat, but not too much for
some definition of too much.
So yeah, so there's that kind of sweet
spot argument, but that doesn't necessarily mean
it has to be specifically n square, right?
You know, maybe I like n to the 2.5 better,
you know, to me that's the sweet spot
or n to the 1.5 might be somebody else's sweet spot.
So yeah, you know, there is the sweet
spot argument, but you know, different reasonable
people might disagree on where the sweet spot
is. On the other hand, there is a particular
mathematical, a kind of economic incentive argument that
leads to the authors to feel that,
well, n squared in particular, exactly n squared
is special.
And it's a little, it's a little bit
subtle, but interesting. Of course, the, you know, the math
behind it, I, you know, even I haven't
gotten deep into the precise, all of the details of the,
of the economic argument and proof, but to
try to, to try to summarize it succinctly,
it's an incentive compatibility argument.
Which basically says, well, the goal is to,
is to incentivize participants,
so to make it incentive compatible, to incentivize,
to reveal, so this is a, this is
a kind of an economic information revelation argument, exactly
of the kind of general variety that prediction
markets are based on, right? So we're trying to
make a market and mechanism that incentive, incentivizes
people voluntarily to reveal information
about, yeah, do you, were you going to
fill that in or another question, either way?
Yeah, so even additional collection, usually like if
you have these five questions on
the ballot ABCDE, you would have, you know,
they're separate things. You vote on each
of them and you have the same influence
on either. Quadratic voting is proposing this
weird idea of like mixing them together. So
whether you vote on all, at all on one, on
one topic affects how much you can influence
another top, right? So it's, it's, you know,
the idea of pooling your influence. And yeah,
so from a traditional, say, pure democratic
perspective, like direct democracy perspective, yeah, this is
weird. Why would you ever want
to do that? Right? Because, well, you're supposed
to be a good citizen in a direct democracy,
you're supposed to read up and come up
with a good decision and make an informed choice
on each of those and your vote counts
on each of them. Right? But quadratic voting is kind
of taking things in a different direction and
saying, you know, in a way it's doing a
little bit, you know, kind of like the
liquid democracy idea, trying to, trying to adapt
to the kind of the reality that different
voters are going to have different levels
of interest in different topics are going to
care more about some things than others.
I totally don't care about a C and
D, but I care a lot about B, right? And I want to
influence B, right? So, so the argument here
as well, let's pool, you know, pool these
decisions and coming back to, you know, what,
what is the basic premise is trying to incentivize
participants to reveal information about their strength of
preference. So this is really
the key word. How strong do you feel
about a particular question? Do you care a little,
a lot, either positively or negatively, or not
at all? Right? So, so the idea, you know,
the goal in quadratic voting is for, you
know, for you to, you know, voters to behave like,
you know, rational participa economically rational participants looking
for outcomes.
And if you don't care at all about
questions, a C and D, then your true strength of opinion
on a C and D is zero, right?
You are from an economically perspective, perspective not willing
to pay a single cent on influencing the
outcome of a C, a C and D, right? So your true preference
is zero. And so the designers of quadratic
voting wanted to say, okay, let's design a system that
incentivizes people to actually pay zero, you know,
if your strength of preference is zero,
but if your strength of preference is higher,
either positively or negatively on other things,
let's say you actually do care about both
B and E, right? But you care more about B than about E,
right? So, you know, now here's the thing.
If you just use, say, a linear,
a linear rule like cumulative voting, you have
10 credits, you care about more about B or B than
than E, but you can take your, well,
you, yeah, if you have 100 credits, well, you can divide them
however you want, and they just affect B
and E linearly, you know, the more you put on B, the
less you can put on E and it
just kind of varies linearly. And basically, well, there's no,
you know, there's no direct incentive compatibility, like
you don't, you know, win something or lose
something by, you know, say, by expressing your
true strength or relative strength of
preference between B and E, you know, versus
just, you know, putting half of your credits on each,
like you, you, you achieve the same total
voting power, whether you just, you know,
put the same amount and put 50 credits
on B and 50 credits on E, regardless of the fact that you
actually care more about, about B. So you
spend, you spend your 100 credits, you know, you, you do
100 credits influence total worth of voting influence,
but if you, if you put 75 credits on
B and 25 credits on E, for example,
well, you've spent 100, you've done 100 credits worth of
influence, right? And so, and so yeah, you
could do that, but there's no economic incentive to do
what, you know, the, the authors say, you
know, think is the right thing, which is to reveal your
true strength of, of preference, right? So here,
so here's why this magic N squared comes in.
So the, the magic, let's say, of the
N squared rule
is basically this.
To say to achieve,
on say a question you care twice as
much about, right?
So, let's say I care twice as much
about B, you know, as I do about E.
And from economic, you know, pure economic theory,
I would say my expected reward from B going my way is twice my expected reward, whatever kind of reward that is from E going my way.
I care about both of them, but I,
you know, I care B exactly twice as much as I care about E because, you know, in expectation, I expect twice the number of rewards from B as E, right?
So, say that's the situation, then I would
like to, I would like to influence both B and E, but I care, you know, I would like to achieve double the influence on a question to achieve double the influence.
I, the participant must spend twice as much
per vote, right?
So, it's only exactly the quadratic rule that
achieves that.
So, so to, so if I want to,
if I want to cast one vote at costs one credit, if I want to cast four votes.
So, sorry, if I want to cast two
votes that costs four credits, meaning that casts four to credits per vote, right?
If you divide the number of credits you
spend by the number of votes you get out of that spend, that particular spend on that particular question, right?
So, the end square divide, you know, divides
by N and you get an end left over, that's how N squared works, right?
So, so your influence, so the cost per
vote goes, increases exactly with N, right?
And N square is absolutely unique in that
way.
You know, into the 1.5 or into the
2.5, you know, will arguably not have this precise property, right?
So, to achieve double the influence on a
particular question, you know, you will have to spend exactly twice as much per, you know, credit in terms of credits per vote.
And because, well, you know, in this example,
you care twice as much about B as you do about E, you are going to, what you're going to do is divide your credits in, into basically, well, you're going to, so if you have 100 credits, you'll use 20 of them, right?
To cast votes for here, you'll use 80
of them to cast votes on here, right?
Well, no, sorry, sorry, this works out if
you have 10 credits total. Let's, so suppose you have 10 credits total, you spend eight of them to, no, that doesn't work either, sorry.
It's, you can, you know, you can do
the math, but let's see, I, so I was thinking, yeah, make it simple. Suppose you have five credits total, or you just divide your credits into five, you spend one here to get one vote, you spend four here to cast two votes, right?
And you have achieved, you know, this, this
goal of, you know, spending, influencing B twice as much as you influence E, right, by dividing your credits accordingly.
And, you know, there's this economic, in part,
argument that this is, you know, kind of the economically rational sweet spot, you know, kind of provable in some, you know, under some appropriate assumptions, right?
So, really interesting idea, technically, right? Does this
make sense?
Questions on the basic idea, how it works?
And where the N squared comes from?
Okay, but that said, what do you think
about it?
Does it sound like a good idea? Would
you like to vote on, on issues like this?
You think it's a terrible idea, but, but,
yeah.
Did you look like you wanted to say
something? Yeah.
I felt like you were just saying, like,
a country and made a system, I don't think the average person of the country would be taking the engaged, the registered.
Yeah, okay, yeah, yeah.
So, let's talk about issues and risks.
There's obviously that, you know, just to understand,
like, you know, the incentive compatibility argument, this is a deeply technical, very niche, geeky, you know, economist thing that no, you know, kind of no ordinary mortals in their right minds is ever going to, you know, get this right.
So, so let's say comprehensibility, right.
Accessibility
to the general public.
Of course, you could imagine running a big
campaign and just saying, hey, you know, let's, you know, just persuade people. Yeah, this is the latest and greatest technology best technologically latest and greatest best way to voting.
See the economists have proved that there's a
theorem. And no, I know you don't understand it, but trust me. It's, you know, it's, it's a proof that this is the right way to vote.
You know, maybe you could get a lot
of people to believe you. Would you would you want to. So even even if you could suppose you could surmount the comprehensibility gap.
What are some other.
Yeah.
How do you oh refill. Yeah, so again,
there's there's different ways that they talk about to make this work. Yeah, kind of the kind of the obvious most arguably democratic way would be just like kind of in each cycle each voting cycle.
Each participant get just automatically gets a refill
of credits, right. So for, you know, for, you know, in Switzerland, Switzerland implemented this, you know, you have a vote every three months. Okay, you get a you get 100 credits.
You know, each three months to vote on
this batch of questions. And, you know, you use it or lose it next month you'll have a brand new batch of 100 credits, regardless of what you did in the last cycle.
So that's one way you could do it.
Of course, there's other ways you could do it too. Yeah.
like the gambling problem.
You put all your money on one thing
and the hit is starting to hit.
You don't have anything left over
for these other topics that are actually important
to you.
All right?
Yeah.
And yeah, you've lost all your influence on
those.
Sorry, you're a loser.
You lost your ability to influence those other
topics.
Sorry for your loss as they say.
Yes.
It's already a problem with normal politics.
How many of you have heard the term
distraction politics?
So you can read about it.
It's a kind of standard thing.
If you want your particular,
if you're a company with money
and you want your particular issue to pass,
what you do, well, you don't campaign for
that
because that might get the wrong kind of
attention
focused on that.
What you want to do is get these
other hot button issues
distracting people away from the thing you care
about
so that to try to make sure nobody's
really paying attention
about this and kind of get your small
group of supporters
to vote in favor of that and hope
that,
well, most people just aren't paying attention
and will either not vote at all
or vote kind of without thinking or looking
too closely.
It sounds like a good idea, sure, that
kind of thing.
But if you've funded or done whatever you
can
to make sure the attention is over there,
not at the issue you care about,
this is where again, this idea,
this thing of bright shiny objects, right?
Comes into play in a big way, right?
So even in normal voting,
where you actually do have one equal vote
on each of the issues, but you might
not use
your influence or use it carefully,
but here, you might, as you said,
basically be incentivized to kind of spend everything
over on the bright shining object
and not have any influence on the thing
that actually really does matter to you
and you should care about, yeah.
Yeah, exactly. Good. Yeah. So the most interested
or affected communities, right,
must spend more, right, and effectively have less
total influence, right? Yeah, if you care a lot about
this particular, you know, the, you know, the
gay rights thing that really personally affects you.
And, you know, you feel like this absolutely
has to pass. Yeah, I know all of these other
things are important too. I would, I would,
you know, do try to do something about that if those
were independent. But yeah, this absolutely has to
put everything I have. Well, that means, that
means, yeah, I'm, you know, my effective total
influence is going to be the square root of,
you know, all of the, all of the
other people who are kind of, yeah, all of them as, you know,
okay, yes, yes, no, no, yes, yes, whatevs,
you know. And yeah, so the more, you know, you could,
you could say that this, you know, is
absolutely not fair to the people who might be most strongly
affected by, you know, the, by the decisions
that really directly influence them. Yeah.
So that could be a problem. So, you
know, these are, these are interesting arguments, you know,
for there are interesting arguments for and against
this idea.
So there's other things that can go wrong.
How about mechanistically? Like, if you,
what if you just want to cheat? You
want to, you really care only about topic B.
And you have your 100 credits, but you
want to make them go farther than the quadratic voting
process technically says you're supposed to be able
to, you know, I want, I have 100 credits,
I want to have more than the 10
votes. I'm supposedly a lot of, yes.
Yeah. Exactly.
So if you can do under the table
trading with other people, yeah, I will, I will, you know,
use one of my votes to vote in
my interest. I'll make a deal with nine other people.
Each of you spend one vote on the
issue I care about. I will spend one, one of my 10 votes
or on each of the issues you each
care about, right? And then we all are spreading our votes out.
We all have much more total influence and
I effectively get a lot more total influence on my
issue. All of my conspirators also get collectively
a lot more total influence on their issues and
it's win, it's win-win for all of us
little conspirator for our little cabal, right? So,
yeah, so that's kind of a problem. Of
course, you know, hopefully this is totally illegal to do
this. I mean, if it was used in
a real election setting, I imagine it would, you know, it had
better be made illegal, right? Does that mean
nobody's going to do it or, you know, is there a way to
prevent it? Yeah.
And I think that's the bottom line of
things. Right now, I'm in my ballots and like in the US,
have this situation where I can both
learn the topic more but not on others
and I might not and try to get
educated
about the topics that I know.
Yeah, good.
So, it kind of gives you permission,
if not even maybe an incentive
not to educate yourself, right?
Do you know, study other topics.
And get what, you know, Robert Dahl would
call enlightened understanding.
Remember, right?
Yeah.
So maybe this is, you know, if we
want to encourage and, you know,
persuade voters that, yeah, you know, these are
important.
These are all important things you should learn
about all of them.
Think about all of them care about all
of them.
Well, this is kind of a reason not
to, right?
Yeah.
distraction politics manipulator.
So this is, yeah, absolutely.
So yeah, kind of get set the agenda
so that kind of this, these hot button
issue,
you pump up the perceived importance
of these particular hot button issues,
get people to spend all their votes,
voting power on those.
They don't have any leftover to fight against
you
and what you actually want to use your
small
but important amount of voting power
because everybody is distracted away
from what you care about, right?
Yes.
Pardon me, it's making people feel like,
for example, I said I want to make
a law
that's not like women's possible.
And then they have another law just that,
it should be that it is legal for
women
and like, there's still a little bit of
add on that.
Right, right.
You could do that.
Now, to try to channel the authors of
quadratic voting
in their defense, what I'm sure they would
argue is,
yeah, if there's something bad on the agenda,
and there's something even worse on the agenda,
and the worst thing is twice as bad
as the bad thing,
well, quadratic voting has you covered, right?
Because, well, you spend twice the number of
credits per vote
voting against the worst thing as against the
bad thing,
you vote against both of those.
And, you know, that's, and, you know,
you're behaving as a good economically rational actor
and then doing exactly what you're supposed to
do, right?
Maybe I'm misunderstanding.
Okay.
Any of you who then like eliminate women.
Yeah, yeah.
And because the women have spent their time.
Okay.
So it's a scare attack.
They basically using it as a scare tactic
to suck away voting
power from what you actually care about.
Yeah, yeah.
Good, very good point.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
So absolutely.
There is, you know, all kinds of potential
ways
you could envision this being manipulated in that
way.
Well, and the other thing, you know,
when you brought up agenda setting, you know,
just the choice like who gets to choose
which issues go on the
ballot at the same time, right?
There's, there's a, you know, I'm sure that
there's a lot you
can do just by influencing that choice, you
know,
which, which things get in this bundle and
which get pushed to
the, to the next one or, you know,
bumped up, right?
That's going to, you know, that's going to
matter for sure.
Yeah.
So anyway, um, yeah, I guess we're, we're
about out of time,
but yeah, yeah.
So anyway, interesting idea.
As you can see, I'm a little bit
of a skeptic myself, despite
the, I'm, I'm the here, here talking about
it, but, you know,
I think it might have a, might have
a place in certain situations.
I feel like, you know, there might be,
there might be reasonable
ways you might use it.
And so I suggest, well, think, think about,
you know, what
might be a reasonable application that might mitigate
the risks
and issues.
Yeah.
Well, person, uh, I, you know, I don't
think personally, I
don't think there isn't, I, you know, a
single ideal way.
There's a lot, I mean, you know, I
think I'm, um, I, I
generally, I agree with the general consensus, election
systems consensus that, you know, the experts are
not, you
know, kind of, there's no clear, you know,
there, there's a lot
of trade-offs and, you know, you know, kind
of different systems
with different advantages and disadvantages.
Basically the, the, the one thing that, you
know, all the
experts agree on is that the, the system
that the US uses is
the worst possible, you know, the, the first,
first, first
past the post, uh, plurality voting, you know,
basically has
all the worst possible combination of features.
And so nobody should be using that, but,
you know, kind of,
and which is why basically everywhere in Europe,
you know,
and the rest of the world has moved
on.
Um, but yeah, two, lots of different systems
that
have different, you know, advantages and disadvantages
that, you know, I, I could, I could
go on about.
Um, personally, I actually love a lot of
things about
single transferable vote, which, which we covered briefly.
Uh, there, there was a reading about it
earlier, even though
it certainly has complexity, I think it could
be improved too.
And I've, I've done, done a little bit
of tentative research
in that space, but, uh, uh, but yeah,
I don't, I don't see a,
you know, and maybe, maybe there will be
a, you know, an ideal
voting system, but it just hasn't been invented
yet.
So we need to, we need to invent
it.
So anyway, okay.
Well, thanks.
So good, uh, more to think about.
And so I'll see you again next week.
