These subtitles have been generated automatically
Okay, welcome back.
We've been talking about a
bunch of different mechanisms,
ideas, technological in some cases,
economics, some cases, political,
for different mechanisms
that I've tried to adapt democracy or affect
democracy
in different ways.
So now, starting this week and for the
next couple of weeks,
I want to kind of step back and
look
at some very, in the context of some
of these ideas,
look back at a very fundamental issue
and focus on the general topic of, let's
say,
digital identity versus privacy and even anonymity.
All right.
So this has been an issue and attention
from the very beginning, the formation of the
internet,
well, and long before, but kind of the
notion of identity
versus anonymity and our attitudes towards the balance
and our attitudes around these issue really strongly
affected the way the internet has formed
and our basic parts of the internet.
And it's really important to, in the way
we think about,
interactions on the internet today as well as
in the past
and in the future, right?
How do we do identity?
And when do we want or need identity
for what purpose is?
And when do we not want identity?
When do we want the lack of identity?
Right.
So and the readings I gave you are
kind of on what
can go wrong if identity is not strong
enough, right?
And this is, sorry, a little under the
weather here.
My voice holds out.
So maybe to set the topic broadly.
So to what extent and for what purposes
do you want stronger
identities versus, say, risks of that and reasons
you might want
weaker identities?
So can you think of kind of examples
or arguments one way or another?
Like for what purposes do you want stronger
identities?
What purposes would you think weaker identities?
Great.
Freedom of speech.
Yeah, so it's an enabler, especially, you know,
it's seen as an enabler of, say, protest.
Resistance, you know, and general organization, especially in
countries where people are not,
you know, you know, don't have great freedoms
normally, right? So yeah, you know, and from the
very beginnings and the very foundations of the
internet, the design of the earliest designers
of the internet always had, you know, this
in mind as one, you know, one way that, you know, kind of
could, could the internet be a democratizer? Could
the internet help people, you know, who don't have
such great freedoms of speech? You know, could
it help that, right? Yeah. Ah, yeah.
Absolutely.
Scams make, or weak identities make scams so
much easier.
If you, if you can, um, so, so
the problem here is lack of accountability or, uh, or recourse, right?
Right. And, you know, weak identities make it,
uh, easy, you know, easy to, um, you know, impersonation.
A lot of these scams, you know, rely
in some way on impersonation, even if not impersonating a, you know, a real, a particular person, you know, impersonating some vague authority figure.
I'm calling from the mail's up mayor's office.
How many of you get regular phone calls from Swiss police department?
Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So I'm surprised it's not
everywhere. Okay. So I don't know. Do you know anything about that in particular?
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, they do that in there
too. Totally the FBI is calling you up. Yeah.
So, you know, weak identities make, make that
kind of thing easier. You, sorry, I, you wanted to say something earlier too, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mm hmm.
Yeah.
Things like just civility.
Right. Kind of, um,
so maintaining, you know, kind of reasonable
behavior,
incentivizing re, you know, reasonable behavior and holding
people accountable if they're not behaving reasonably, like, you know,
you know, uh, yeah, go ahead.
Yeah.
Uh huh. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. So, and there's
two, two issues here, right?
One which, you know, I think Instagram, you
know, probably cares about a little bit, but not, you know, maybe you care about more is the, is the kind of invasiveness.
Whoops.
And especially the privacy invasiveness of identity, right?
Having to show your ID, prove your ID.
And do you really want to trust these
platform, all of these platforms with all of that strong identity information.
But what the platforms care about is, sorry.
Ah, yeah. So what, what they want, right,
is, is, uh,
So, yeah,
they want to track you to, to make
more money advertising, right?
So if you're, if your business is monetizing,
you know, monetizing, you know, the internet, then yeah, you know, more tracking, more identity, you know, is better for that.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
that identity comes at multiple levels,
different levels of abstraction.
And this is important in thinking about this,
right?
So there's the software
or say platform level, right?
Kind of who, how does Instagram know you
or think they know you, right?
Your account, there's also network level, for example,
like IP address, right?
And for other software that might use different
proxies
for your identity, there's,
so there's other technological proxies for identity
such as phone numbers, right?
So, the way what's happened,
any messenger apps traditionally identify someone,
well, kind of we know you're someone with
a phone number,
that's what we care about, right?
And, but yeah, it serves some purposes
and not others, right?
Yeah, another,
another actually, so I actually should have put
this
over here because from the perspective of,
the platforms and the advertisers,
they want stronger identity for this purpose, right?
So that they can sell ads about you
and use your data to make more of
a profit.
But there's a very important reason that,
if all of the platforms wanted,
thought, we can't operate unless we check strong
identities,
they'd probably do it, right?
They can afford it, but what's the real
reason
they do not do that, right?
Even though, yeah, it would be totally good
for their advertising bottom line, yeah?
Well, I mean, they could write a contract
saying,
you cannot use Instagram or Facebook, et cetera,
unless you show your ID, it's part of
the terms of,
they can put it in the terms of
the conditions, right?
Yeah, yeah, so, okay, yeah, there we go.
So they are partly concerned with,
like, do we want the exposure to this
kind of trouble
if we ask for strong identities and it
leaks?
So yeah, you're right, they are concerned with
that.
Yeah, yeah.
You mean the platforms couldn't?
Yeah, some of them want to be able
to fake activity,
yeah, potentially, but I'm not sure
if that's a real strong reason.
Some platforms are more kind of bot friendly
than others.
Twitter has been, slash X has been traditionally
very like bot friendly, like, we love bots,
right?
A bunch of people's identity and everything that
leaks.
Absolutely.
So this is certainly a big, you know,
and I think increasingly increasing issue, right?
So risk of leaks and, you know, exposure,
legal exposure, financial exposure.
If something goes wrong, you know, it's better
not to have that kind of stuff than to, yeah.
So, you know, many of the platforms do
think that way.
But there's actually another even simpler, more mundane
reason that I know from talking to many of them that they do it, only do not want to stronger identities.
Right? Yeah.
Identity. Oh, use a patient like identity theft.
Yeah.
Why is that, why would that risk be,
would that risk be stronger with, worse with stronger identities or better?
Well,
I think
Yes.
Mm hmm.
Yeah. So, for example, yeah, like, you know,
kind of this is already a well known problem with the habits of, you know, many hotels in many countries, you know, many of which are obligated to, you know, demand a for, you know, passport or form of ID, make a photocopy and store it there.
And then somebody, you know, an insider or
just anybody with that access to that box can go say, oh, this dude looks kind of similar to me.
I wonder if I can get away with
using his ID. Right. So, yeah, you know, this is not new to the internet, but you know, the same thing happened, the same risk happens like, you know, an insider in one of these platforms or something with that big access to that big identity database.
Well, like this is a lot of, you
know, goldmine for identity theft and misuse. So yeah, good point. But the mundane reason I have in mind actually has nothing to do with private privacy or security.
It's totally stupid. Right. Convenience.
Right. Just the inconvenience
of, you know, ID verification and the potential,
potential
loss of users.
Right. The platforms, you know, for many for
like decades now, their number one mantra has been to achieve anything you want, you've got to grow, you've got to attract users, you've got to take a look at the
world, you've got to get as many users
as possible onto your platform in order to get your, get their eyeballs glued to your platform and sell them ads. So this, you know, of course figures into the advertising thing too.
But, you know, to, to get advertising revenues,
first you got to get the users and you do not want to impose roadblocks, you know, any, any more than necessary, you want to make it absolutely super convenient to sign on, you know, kind of get a get rid of any possible roadblocks
and you absolutely have to. Right. So this
has actually been the traditional reason that the platforms do not want to, you know, kind of impose any, any stronger checks, unless they really have to because well it's just, you know, it's just inconvenient, you know, and they do not want to scare users away
by, you know, by, you know, invasive, you
know, account creation, screening, you know, kind of processes that demand this and that and all kinds of stuff. They want a process where you say, okay, you want an account, okay, email address or phone number, you know, one basic thing, okay, you're on, okay, start, start browsing, start generating us advertising revenues, right.
So, yeah. Now, we could envision maybe that
being solvable, like if the internet had a kind of a common global identity framework if the internet knew how to identify people, right, but it doesn't, right, is kind of the platforms would have to, you know, each platform would typically have to do it separately, right.
And so financial institutions do it because they
kind of have to legally, but most platforms are pretty resistant, yeah.
There actually are a lot of people without,
you know,
kind of legal documents, even some that officially
have no legal nationality, stateless people,
often refugees of many kinds are very,
whoops, are very, very often in this category.
Like you had identities, but it got, you
know,
burned in the war zone that got blown
up or whatever
when they had to flee, right?
Yeah, yeah, so yeah, absolutely.
There's these, you know, kind of ethical
and exclusion reasons and, you know, coming back
to,
coming back to the basics of democracy,
one of the principles is inclusion, right?
Every, everyone, you know, should be included, you
know,
and we don't wanna exclude people from participation.
And that's, you know, as we said, like
right from the,
you know, first lecture around about Usenet,
that's one of the things that, you know,
the early internet
and Usenet really tried hard to, you know,
be inclusive
to kind of allow anybody to use it
with no barriers
or roadblocks and to a great degree, it
succeeded,
but, you know, and having weak identities
was arguably part of that.
And so it contributes to the inclusiveness of
the internet,
but yeah, it also contributes to these,
these are the flip side problems, right?
Good, yeah.
Yeah, so, yeah, so these are good considerations
to start with, start with.
Now, let's,
so let's focus a little bit on the
particular problem,
some of the particular problems.
And then, you know, the symptoms, some of
which we've,
you know, we're kind of already mentioned here,
like the, like the scans, things like that.
But,
but especially focusing on what we call, well,
specific to computer science.
But it's come into somewhat wider use.
Any of you know what the term SIBOL
comes from?
Where did this term come from?
So you haven't read the assigned reading yet.
Shame on you.
Nobody has read the assigned reading yet.
Okay.
That's okay.
So it can.
So it most recently comes from a great
short paper called the SIBOL
attack.
Oops.
By a great Microsoft researcher named John Dusser.
But he didn't really invent the name later.
Either he was in turn inspired by a
much earlier event in what the
60s or 70s.
There was a book named by the title
SIBOL.
It was written by a psychiatrist or psychologist
who has studied a
particular interesting patient who had a particularly interesting
case of multiple personality disorder.
Like one woman who had like 20 some
personalities in her head.
Right.
And it was a kind of super interesting.
Just, you know, the book got got a
lot of attention and was just
very interesting because it was, you know, and
this was a pseudonym,
of course, for the real patient that doctor,
you know, wrote a book about
her, but didn't didn't use the real patient's
name.
So this is just the pseudonym that the
doctor came up with for the
patient, I guess.
Right.
So she was named with say SIBOL.
Right.
And John Dusser, you know, kind of around
2000 ish when he wrote this
book, you know, was observing how the internet,
you know, has this
seems to have this severe case of multiple
personality disorder.
Right.
Which is basically comes from the weak identities.
Right.
So the fact that, you know, IP addresses
by default are just numbers
and don't automatically tell you practically anything about
who's at
the IP address or, you know, what they're
doing or why or anything like that.
And so it's basically about, you know, kind
of the problems this creates
for distributed systems and decentralized systems.
If we want to build systems in this
strong identity model, it tends to
break a lot of things.
It makes it easy to for a lot
of things to break.
Right.
For example, as I mentioned, IP addresses,
they're just information poor.
They don't tell you anything about the reputation
or kind of what, who's behind it, right?
So that might be a problem,
that might be a disadvantage,
for purposes of scans and impersonation and stuff
like that.
On the other hand, it might be an
advantage, right?
I'm great. Hey, excellent.
Who does? Yeah, no problem.
Yeah. Yes.
So only one of the problem is the
actual weakness of the identity.
The other big problem is identities are cheap,
right?
Disposable, right?
And most importantly, very cheaply, automatically,
synthesizable.
And I'll even emphasize at scale, right?
With computers, you don't, you know, if you
don't have strong identities
and you want to create fake identities on
the internet,
you don't have to be happy with one
or two.
If you're not happy with one or two,
you can have a thousand.
You can have a million.
Just, you know, write some code, you know,
and, you know,
you can have as many identities as you
want for pretty cheap.
Yeah, you had a, yeah.
In a minute, I'm gonna come to anti-Sibyl
defenses, right?
And this is an example, right?
There's a number of interesting ways you can
try
to address the Sibyl attack.
But before we even get there,
I wanna emphasize that kind of there's two,
the important point that there's kind of two
fundamentally separate issues here, right?
One is the fact that by default,
say IP addresses or any kind of weak
internet identity,
even phone numbers to some degree are just
numbers.
They don't bring any information automatically
about the person behind them if there is
a person, right?
That's part of the problem,
which is relevant in some cases, right?
The other part of the problem though,
is the cheapness, the disposability
and the synthesizability at scale, right?
And these two aspects tend to get confounded.
And but some of the problems we see
with weak identities
That's a pretty tough question. Hard to say.
But I think, you know, I'm, as always, I'm an optimist. I see ways forward, right? You know, I don't, I don't know if they leave to a perfect solution or anything like that.
like from the internet without any problems or
anything that they're always going to have to rough on?
Well, that's a tough question. That's a pretty
tough question. Hard to say. But I think, you know, I'm,
as always, I'm an optimist. I see ways
forward, right? You know, I don't know if they lead to a
perfect solution or anything, but I see ways
that things could be made better anyway, right?
And I think, yeah, one of the, and
I think one of the ways
things can be made better is to understand
this separation, the, the, this fact that there are
really two different problems, right?
Right. So let me give you a couple
examples, right?
So let's call this problem A and let's
call this problem B.
So problem A, so, well, well, give me
a, give me an example of, you know, a case that's,
you know, a practical issue that happens that's
very specific to, you know, problem A, the fact
that identities don't have much information attached. Sorry?
Hate speech. Yeah. Exactly. So great.
You also had something? Yeah. Yeah. So, and,
and these kinds of steps, right? You know,
are already another good example where somebody is,
you know, let's say carrying out blatant
illegal behavior and using anonymity or, or the,
the perception at least of anonymity
to avoid getting caught or avoid being accountable,
right?
Right. So, so, you know, using, you know,
anonymity or lack of a, of strong identity to
avoid getting caught by the police and, you
know, kind of, or, or, you know, by, you know, censored
or anything for, for misbehaving, you know, right?
So, yeah, so that's from the fact that, well,
you know, identities don't let you track misbehavior
back to the source in order to,
in order to do something about that, right?
On the other hand, what's, what's an example that's,
you know, especially, you know, characteristic of problem
B? Yeah. Great. Yeah.
Great. So more, yeah, more generally, yeah. So
especially in elections, but more generally,
social bots, right? Social media bots that are
trying to influence, you know, people's behavior,
trying to push ideas to, you know, sometimes
manipulate elections, sometimes just do other
things, just get, you know, push this product
to get more advertising revenues or, you know,
something like that. So there's a lot of
purposes that social bots are used for. And,
and yeah, so that's a good example of
this because, well, each of those, these bots is usually probably
not that important by itself, right? These are,
you know, the bots themselves are cheap, disposable,
you know, automatically synthesized things, and many of
them get caught. There's, you know,
some user reports, hey, this is a, this
looks like a bot shut it down. Their accounts get,
get, you know, often get detected and killed
by the platforms and stuff.
But because they're cheap and disposable, well, the
bot makers can always make more bots, right?
And it's kind of more, it's, it's, it's,
it's really like, you know, fighting this problem
isn't about, you know, being able to track
down or not who's behind the bot really.
It's about like, not even being able to
like, you know, the bots are coming too fast, right?
It's a, it's a arms race of between
bot creation, the constant creation of new bots,
and detection, right? And the platforms, you know,
all the platforms try to, you know,
detect and get bots, at least, you know,
misbehaving bots shut down. But, well, the bot creators,
you know, he refining their ways to make
more convincing bots that slip behind the,
slip past the current detection schemes or, you
know, you know, may often they rely on,
you know, just humans to detect, you know,
as they only even start detecting a bot when some human,
you know, kind of reports, hey, I think
this is a misbehaving bot. Can you do something about that?
And some, you know, and so, you know,
the creation, it can be fully automatic, whereas the detection,
you know, requires human in the loop, you
know, who's who's going to win, right? So, yeah, so,
so that's, yeah, yeah, good, good examples of,
of this issue, right?
Um, yeah, other, other thoughts on, on either,
on either side, right? Yeah.
Yeah.
Great.
Also, things like, just email spam, you know,
email spammers, the way they operate, you know,
they're not, they're not, they're not sending spam,
you know, kind of directly from their,
you know, home machine, they, they rent or
buy or, you know, time on these big, you know,
kind of illegal or black market, gray market
bot, bot nets, or they run their own in order to have
a lot of, you know, machines from, you
know, around the world, you know, spending,
sending spam instead of, instead of themselves, right?
And so, so, beside, you know, kind of
the recent, recent election bots are trying to
influence, influence a legitimate, you know, kind of
normal elections. Another thing that has
been happened before is people have tried to
hell, hold, you know, votes on the internet for
random things, not usually political elections, but there
was this classic, uh, situation, I
didn't already talk about the Dunesbury incident in,
in a previous lecture. I think it was in my
other course that I talked about it. Yeah.
Um, where, yeah, you know, and this might be already
a couple decades ago, but, uh, uh, in
one of these, uh, cartoons, um, you know, wanted to be
internet savvy and the, the, the, the author
of this cartoon decided to, uh, decided, well,
this cartoon character is going to go to
college, but which college? So let's, let's ask the internet,
which college should this character go? So, well,
okay, democracy, let's hold a vote, right?
You know, internet based vote on which college
this cartoon character should go to, right? Um,
and, uh, and, you know, so they set
up this, this internet vote and, you know, because people
did that, did this back then, you know,
and people didn't realize back then just what a terrible
idea this is. They decided, you know, okay,
one vote per IP address. That's how we're gonna,
that's, that's gonna be the way to, you
know, prevent ballot stuffing, right? So
each IP address gets one vote and then
your IP address gets logged when you can't, can't vote
anymore. Well, um, so this has, of course,
two problems, right? One is a, one is a exclusion
problem. So any of you, you can think
of the reason why this is an exclusion problem. Some
people who should get to vote didn't get
to vote. Yeah.
Yep.
Yeah, yeah, indeed. Well, and in fact, this
happens all the time, increasingly. It wasn't quite so
per ubiquitous then, but now it's totally a
network, network address translation. You know, if you,
if you haven't, you know, encountered this yet,
you will in, you know, networking courses and stuff.
Most people don't have a, their own permanent
IP address anymore because, because you just have
a temporary, your whole home network and, you
know, often many computers on campus networks
share IP addresses dynamically, you know, because IP
addresses, there's only four billion of them,
you know, is there, there, there are still
a 32 bit address space and IP version six hasn't been
fully adopted, right? And so yeah, many people,
you know, kind of don't have a permanent IP address.
So if you're, if you and somebody else
in your home or, you know, behind the same
NAT IP address, try to, try to vote
in this election, only the first one wins, right? Only
the first one gets to vote at all,
right? But then of course, the other big problem was that
if you do have access to a lot
of IP addresses, well, you can totally stuff the ballot, right?
And so there are some enterprising MIT undergrads.
Notice that, well, at that time, MIT had a
Class A network, which, well, you know, once
you take a networking course, if you're,
don't know it all this already, a Class
A network is, is one with, with an 8 bit prefix and 24 bits
of network, right? Subnet, which means there were
what 24, 24 million IP addresses on the,
on the MIT network at the time, most
of which were not used. So these, you know, the undergrads
basically wrote a, wrote a little script that
would, you know, dynamically change the IP address,
you know, cast a vote in this, find
the next sequential IP address that doesn't look like
it's being used, cast a vote from there
and keep repeating for, you know, hours or days, right?
And so guess, guess which, which university happened
to win this vote, right? So, so, yeah,
yeah, so, and that's, that's kind of directly,
you know, directly emerges from, you know,
kind of the cheapness, the disposability, not just
the weakness of, of, of identities, right?
So, okay, so yeah, it's, it's time for,
let's, let's take the break that we're due to and we'll,
we'll look at a little bit deeper into,
into different types of Sibyl attacks in different ways,
you know, potential ways to, to address them.
So let's come back at four, four, fifteen.
Okay, let's, let's talk about,
come to talk about different approaches to dealing
with the Sibyl or, or, or BOT type
attacks, right? And there, there's a lot of
interesting potential ways to deal with them.
Of course, there's, you know, weaker ways and
stronger ways, less invasive ways and more invasive
ways. Some examples. So I already mentioned one
in the, the Dunesbury incident, right? So they,
they tried a, a very weak way is
to, so use weak identity proxies,
such as IP address, right?
Try to, you know, assume, assume real people
have one IP address each and, you know, let,
let people cast one vote per IP address.
Well, yeah, that didn't work very well in this,
this cartoonic example and in many other cases
where it's been used. Yeah.
Sorry. Tap chat. Great, great. Uh-huh.
So actually, before I come to that, let
me just feel this out. Of course, there are other proxies
like phone numbers, which are maybe a little
bit stronger, but still, still weak because real
people can have multiple, even many phone numbers
too, right? They're, they're just a little bit
more expensive. Yeah.
Yeah.
Great. So MAC addresses can also, and sometimes
are used as identity proxies. Also, ah, yeah,
of course, email addresses, right? Basically, all the
websites that are letting you, you know,
create an account and just asking for an
email address and nothing else. Well, you know, traditionally,
that's what the platforms want because it doesn't
scare away users too much, right? It's, it's a very
easy requirement to satisfy for, you know, it's
not that exclusionary because it's easy to get an
email address, right? And so, you know, to
be a civil attacker, a social bot attacker, you know,
against email address verification, well, you at least
have to know how to create a lot of email
accounts. But yeah, that's not that hard, right?
Furthermore, you know, as many people know, many,
you know, for privacy reasons, many email address
providers, including Google and Apple, allow you
to have, you know, one, say, Google or
Apple account and generate an infinite number of email
addresses from them, right? So, in with, with
email addresses, you can write your user ID
plus anything you want, and it'll go to,
I'll go to your user ID and Apple head. Yeah.
Yeah, yeah. So, if you know, single use
email addresses, yeah. So, so, so those are, yeah,
email addresses have become super disposable, basically. Yeah.
So these are, you know, among
the weakest of the, of the identity proxies,
right? Okay, but let's come back to CAPTCHA. So,
CAPTCHA is interesting because it's trying to do
something different. It's trying to distinguish
humans from bots, right?
Yeah. Sorry, this is getting kind of crowded
together. Yeah. So, it was certainly an interesting
idea and it has gotten used and it
is getting used a lot, right? Yeah.
Exactly. So the attacks on CAPTCHA systems have
been getting much better, very fast, right?
Especially with AI, right? So AI is getting
really good at solving CAPTCHAs, right?
So if you want to be a spammer,
a DDoS attacker or something and get past CAPTCHA defenses,
just invest in the best CAPTCHA solving AI,
right? And that's one way to be on your way, yeah.
Right. The recapture, yeah, which was used for
AI training.
Which was you know, a clever trick while
it last, right?
The problem here is, you know, both the
attackers
and the defenders have access to AI, right,
and they can learn from each other, right?
And here's the problem, you know, if you
accept that we're stuck in the endless arms race,
then we really are all doomed because look
at the end point of where this arms race goes, especially the capture arms race, right?
So, you know, coming back to, you know,
how captures have been getting harder, right?
For real people, for a good reason, right?
Because of these attacks, right?
So, the captures you're seeing now are a
lot more obfuscated than the captures you saw, you know, five or ten years ago, right?
So, the captures, and, you know, this has
already been a problem for a while.
So, they're getting harder, progressively harder for real
people.
And, you know, so for a long time
there's been a class of people that has been, persistently has difficulty with captures, right?
Because, and that class of people that has
difficulty with captures is rapidly growing, right?
Because the captures are getting harder, right? Because
of these pressures, right?
And, you know, this can be, well, because
the captures are visually confusing.
Many of them are, you know, it's really
not clear what letter that is because it's obfuscated underneath these other random lines and colors and things like that, yeah?
So, yeah, the audio alternative, of course, was
created partly because of this problem, you know, that, you know, captures were recognized as, you know, effectively exclusionary to a lot of people, you know, who have difficulty with the visual thing, you know,
or just because the visual thing is so
hard, and yeah, you know, maybe the AI hasn't quite caught up on the audio side, trust me, it will suit, right?
You know, kind of the, you're relying on
the audio capture to be easier, well, just wait, right?
So, yeah, so that's, you know, that's just
part of the arms race, right?
And so, you know, so the clear end
point, you know, kind of the question is, will captures survive at all?
Or are captures kind of like playing chess,
where, you know, at some point, you know, the computer, the AIs get better on it than the real human is on average, right?
Just a man, it's just a matter of
how much you invest, right?
So, you know, the moment, you know, kind
of, and I don't know exactly when this line will be crossed, or is it already crossed, right?
Just depending on, you know, how much you
invest in your capture solving AI, right?
So, so it, you know, it seems clear
that eventually, probably, you know, AI, you know, will be better than real humans.
At least doing this particular thing, right?
It's not too hard to make that prediction.
And, you know, at that point, you know,
captures will be officially unusable, you know, anymore, unless you just want to, you know, basically exclude mostly real people without keeping the bots out at all, right?
But they're already, you know, they're already exclusionary,
right? That's clear. It makes it, you know, makes it difficult for some, often many real humans, right? So,
so that's a persistent problem.
Okay. Okay. Yeah, so, but captures were a
great idea. Well, yeah.
Okay.
Mm hmm.
You mean like a PKI, sorry, public, public
key infrastructure certificate. Yeah. Great.
Yeah. So that's, that's a nice, you know,
example of a form of slightly stronger identity.
So it's, it's, you know, sufficiently more costly
and harder to get a, you know, a legitimate cryptographic certificate, you have to go to a PKI provider and, you know, kind of sign up and it's kind of a whole little process.
And so it's, it's, so it's definitely stronger.
But it has, you know, it's also costly
and inconvenient.
So there was, there was a time when,
you know, PKI and cryptographic certificates were seen as the, you know, kind of the answer to the identity problem.
But ultimately, they only ended up really getting
adopted by websites. And so they're, they, they are seeing now as kind of the solution for the identity problem for websites, not for people.
Right. Yeah.
So great. So bootstrapping trust from Post-O-Mail.
Right? And that's basically what the bank is
trying to do. They're trying to make sure it's you and, of course, somebody who intercepted one letter that intended for you can't possibly intercept the other letter too.
Right? I mean, they know that this is
kind of a weak defense, but yeah, it's better than having everything come in the same letter, I guess.
But yeah, they're just kind of trying to
bootstrap trust from the Post-O-Service. Let's assume the Post-O-Service works and is reliable and people aren't intercepting your Post-O-Mail.
And then, yeah. And yeah, here in Switzerland,
it's even more common that, you know, the Swiss totally trust their Post-O-Service, even though from personal experience, I know they shouldn't.
Things go wrong even here with Post-O-Mail. Right?
So I had a few months where everything that was sent to me was getting black hole mysteriously, even though they knew exactly where I lived the whole time.
But no, it was all either disappearing or
being returned to sender or something. Yeah.
Yeah. So these are good examples.
So now, let's...
Yeah. So let me, you know, coming back
to this kind of this AV distinction I was making earlier, I want to push on that further and look at some of these defenses, plus others from this perspective,
by differentiating what I would call proof of
identity from what I call proof of personhood.
Oh, this is... Has anybody heard the term
proof of personhood before? Yeah. Yeah, I don't think it's that common yet, but...
And it's still kind of an ongoing discussion
about exactly what it means and what the distinction means. But the way I see it, an example of proof of identity, like what you're proving if you're trying to prove your identity,
stronger identity is informally who you are. And
usually this, we formulate this in terms of properties or attributes.
Information about you. Right? So what's the simplest,
most classic way you have to... You're often expected to prove your identity when you're just having a party?
For example, yeah.
Okay. You mean just a classic signature? Yeah.
Okay. So your signature is one of your attributes that can be checked and verified. Right? So it's another identity proxy for your identity. You know, it's very traditionally used in the pre-online world. Yeah.
But yeah.
Right. Yeah. So online ID checks, right?
Where you're expected to hold up your identity
card and some probably AI thing is trying to make sure, yeah, it's the real person, real-life person, not just... I'm holding a photo of the same photo up there, you know.
And it's, you know, trying to verify that,
yeah, it's the same photo as the same person is on the ID card and the name matches, etc., etc. Right? So, but yeah. So this is an example of, you know, proof of... You know, I attempted a proof of identity process, but what they're checking there, they're checking things like photo and name.
Yeah. So usually when you're meeting someone, you're
not that worried about, you know, why would they lie about their name? Or if they do lie about their name, maybe they have a good reason, a privacy reason, which we can, you know, respect. Okay. You want to go under a pseudonym? Okay. Be a pseudonym. Whatever pseudonym you want, as long as you're a decent person. Right? You know.
So, yeah. So usually when a business cares
about your name, it's usually for some legal reason, right? Like, because they are legally obligated. So financial institutions are the classic example that, you know, that, you know, kind of are legally obligated to do this kind of thing.
For this process called KYC, know your customer,
right? So, because, you know, they're legally obligated to have records of who, according to some, you know, official ID, you know, by the name, and, you know, holds this account so that, you know, they're not going to be able to do this.
But if that, if the account holder starts
committing some kind of financial fraud, the police can go after that, right? So this is very much, you know, an accountability, especially for, you know, legal and financial investigation purposes, right?
So anti-fraud and anti-money-lundry, right?
So this is also called a KYC-AML, right?
Anti-money-lundry is a common term they use, right?
But usually even then, the bank totally doesn't
care what your name is. The only thing they care about is that they are legally required to have attached a name to the account that the police or financial investigators or tax people or whatever could come out, come look at if needed, right?
To track down, you know, fraudulent or suspicious
activity, right?
So they have to do that to keep
that record and be able to attest that, well, we checked their identity. They don't even care if your identity is real. They don't care that much.
They care that they have done this process
and they can put a check mark and, you know, and basically have the legal coverage of the cover of having done this and done their due diligence on their customer to know their customers.
That's what they mean. They don't actually know
you. They don't know your favorite color or ice cream flavor or anything. They don't even care about your name.
They care about being able to prove to,
you know, some other lawyers down the line, if necessary, that they've done their due diligence and kept records and, you know, can't be sued on the basis of not having done that. Yeah.
Yep.
They want the date.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. So, often, you know, various things as
some of this is just again, you know, more stuff to track you down with for the police to track you down with if they ever need to, right?
So, you know, and some of it is
like, you know, very privacy invasive and, you know, very potentially trackable, but, well, you know, kind of they have there's these legal legal
intentions, which are an especially big deal in
the financial world when there's a lot of real money at stake, right? So they, they, they're accustomed to, you know, kind of leaving privacy a little bit farther behind in that case. Yeah.
Yeah.
So you're talking about in-person verification.
But what are they verifying when you go
in-person?
Are you talking about when you go in-person
to the government
to check to sign up for a passport
or something,
or are you talking about somebody who's using
that?
Let's link to a live data base.
So they have a big database,
but what do they have in the database
to identify you the next time?
you know, kind of government initiated strong biometric
identity, right?
So they're all about building this big database
of,
you know, all 10 fingerprints and all the
two irises
of everyone who signs up and, you know,
has the two eyes and the 10 fingers
still.
Not everybody does, right?
You know?
Of course, you know, yeah.
And so they have this big database
with all of those biometrics.
And anytime you go back, you know,
kind of and use the identity you're expected
to authenticate,
you know, biometrically, right?
To check, is it really you, right?
So it has some very appealing scalability advantages
and ad defraud advantages.
And, you know, kind of there's good reasons
that the Indian government decided to do this,
right?
They had a huge problem, right?
On the other hand, it's also a, you
know,
a really big fact, you know, target for,
you know,
privacy risks, leaks, you know,
I bet I wonder how many spy agencies,
you know,
in other countries do not yet have copies
of that database,
you know, regularly infiltrated for all kinds
of nefarious purposes.
So, you know, it's, I understand the reason
it's also super scary in many ways.
But on the other hand, it's also not
really unique
because what the US and other governments
have been doing forever, well, you know, biometric,
what they call a biometric passport.
Well, yeah, it might not have all of
you,
I'm not sure, you know, kind of which
biometrics
they all have to have, but they all
have a photo
at the bare minimum, right?
You know, kind of forever identity cards
have at least had to have a photo.
That's a biometric, you know, it's,
and so, you know, it might be just
ordinary people
at the office that you show up to,
looking at the ID and saying, okay,
it's, you know, making a human judgment
is the same person, right?
You know, that is a biometric identity verification.
It's not a perfect one, but, you know,
it's kind of worked for a long time,
not perfectly, but kind of works, right?
So, yeah, so that's one way to do
it.
So, but, but again, what you're trying to
get
is often not, you know, you're trying to
get
you know, authentication or, and especially in India's
case,
they were trying to fight fraud, like the,
the actual, the real life example,
analog of civil, civil attacks,
where basically people were, you know,
creating fake people, signing up fake people
on the, on the rosters in order to,
to get social benefits from, you know,
kind of additional children you don't already have,
you don't actually have or, or, you know,
these,
you know, kind of several uncles that are
actually,
you know, that actually died, but you're still
getting reward
and getting, you know, social benefits from them,
right?
You know, this was part, another part of
the reason
for motivation for ad hoc to, you know,
reduce vulnerability to that kind of fraud.
But, yeah, but, you know, but so it,
it has some understandable advantages,
but also comes with a lot of risks.
There, there's a very simple case though.
One of these properties that often,
often people are interested in,
that's just something about you, right?
So it was actually mentioned, age verification, right?
When you're just trying to, you know,
this often comes with, you know, buying alcohol,
you know,
the vendor, the alcohol vendor, again,
doesn't care about your name or anything about
you,
you know, hopefully not.
They only care if you're legally old enough,
you know,
to satisfy the relevant minimum age law, right?
So they, they don't even care.
So yeah, the ID has your date of
birth on it probably,
but they don't care about what your date
of birth is.
They just care whether you're old enough, right?
And so, so this motivates,
and well, and so in the, in the
case of,
so, so identity typically focuses on these properties.
What's your name?
What's your social security number?
What's your age?
What's your gender?
That's typically on the ID card too.
And that's, that's, that's an exclusion and, you
know,
privacy risk problem too for all kinds of,
all kinds of reasons, right?
But yeah, so identity is, is attribute focused,
right?
But a lot of the applications totally don't
care about,
you know, what these specific attributes are.
They care about accountability and, and defraud and,
you know,
things like that, right?
Or just are you old enough, right?
So, so this is what really kind of
inspires the idea
of proof of personhood, right?
Can we, and this is, this is,
this is my optimism,
optimist side shining through now, right?
Can we verify real people?
Oops.
Without identifying them.
All right.
So,
so can we, you know, can we somehow
achieve,
you know, both privacy, even anonymity,
even strong anonymity,
without making the identities disposable, right?
You know, without losing, you know,
provide strong privacy, even anonymity
without losing accountability, right?
So,
so I like this to use this term,
accountable anonymity,
because I think it's not an oxymoron, right?
It might sound like an oxymoron,
but I don't think it is.
Yeah.
term and since then a bunch of projects
here and there have have have explored different
approaches to proof of personhood. Right. So they're
they're still fairly niche, most of
them. So, you know, unsurprising if you've never
heard of any of them. But there's there's
lots of different approaches, but I would classify
into four main approaches. One is the one I
suggested like, so let's say in person. When
I first first wrote about this, like, posted,
and you know, 1520 years ago, now I'll
come to that in a minute. So kind of like going to the
government government office kind of do it, you
know, kind of prove you're a person for real,
a real life person with a real body.
But yeah, so I'll come back to that in a minute.
Approach two is basically based on social or
trust networks. This is, you know, mostly related to
the PKI, you know, or PGA, if any
of you have ever heard of PGP key signing parties and things like
that, Web of Trust kinds of things. There's
a lot of exploration, especially in the blockchain
crowd, you know, there's a lot of people
interested in this kind of Web of Trust approach. And
there's various ways. Yeah.
So
right, exactly. So it's, it's easy to solve
with mass surveillance, right?
So yeah, absolutely. China has this problem totally
solved. I'm not sure if I like their solution,
but you can't argue that they've solved the
problem, right? So yeah, let's acknowledge that.
And so, so there's also,
ah, yeah, and the other approach, you can
use biometric,
biometric identity and authentication for proof of personhood
as well. If you, you know, and you
can even make it, you know, not as
much of a privacy nightmare as I think ADHAR is, if you,
you know, with some additional technical provisions that,
in the way you use it. And actually,
that's, that's a topic of some ongoing research.
One of my PhD students is, is focusing on, you
know, can we make biometrics, you know, less
identity, less, less of a nightmare? I think that's
still a, still an open question, but, but,
you know, so, so yeah, you know, there's different,
different ways, ways to do this with, with
different tradeoffs. Let me, let me, since we're
running out of time, let me briefly outline
the, the in-person idea that I proposed quite a while ago,
which I called pseudonym parties.
And some of these more recent proof of
personhood projects have actually tried to take it and make,
make variations that actually take the process online,
like to partly inspired by CAPTCHAs, actually,
or, so let's, let's call this presence-based, right?
You're trying to,
you're trying to see if there's a real
person there, right? And so, actually, before, before I
get that, let me, let me say briefly,
one of the more recent projects called IDENA, which is also
presence-based, but, but online, where basically you have
groups of people, it, it kind of gets groups
of people to submit little CAPTCHA-like tests, they're,
they're, they call it flip puzzles.
But these have to be both created by
people and solved by people for, for different reasons, so the,
the classic CAPTCHA mechanism doesn't exactly work, but
they basically say, okay, you want to sign up
on this system, you, you, you have to
come at, get online at this particular future time,
you know, synchronously with a bunch of other
participants who are also committing to do this,
and you have to solve one or a
couple of these, these little puzzles, I, I should have, they're,
they're like a sequence of four pictures, and
you see in both the real, the real order that the
creator of the puzzle intended, they're just puzzle
that a puzzle, you know, sequence of picture that
in the correct order tells a story of
some kind, and in a permuted order just makes no sense, right?
So, and you have to, as a human,
kind of prove you're a human by picking the one that has the,
that tells the story, right? That makes sense,
right? And so it's kind of like a CAPTCHA, but you
have to do it at the same time
as other people are, are doing it, and the idea of being, well,
if there's only one of you, you'll have
only one consciousness, it's going to be hard for a real
person to, to do this, you know, many
times for many different identities at once. Yeah.
The AI? Yes. So I kind of expect
so. I am personally skeptical that this will last long
against AI. On the other hand, there's a
really interesting experience paper about this identity
system that I think, I think it's on
the optional readings, I'll make sure it is, if it's not.
It's been running for a number of years,
and they, they haven't seen obvious evidence that,
that AI was being used at scale to
fake these, these challenges, right? You know, maybe that's
just because the system is small enough that
nobody, nobody with a big enough AI cares about it
enough, right? But, but anyway, that a very
different attack, you know, became a big problem
for this system, because it's also a blockchain
cryptocurrency system with money thing. Miners
were just hiring real people to solve these,
right? And that's something you can of course do with
CAPTCHAs too, and, and people do just hire
minions, real people, you know, who are solving these
things and giving you their keys or their,
their rewards or things like that, and they don't know,
and, and anyway, so, so, you know, this
is a, this is an interesting alternative that, you know,
has been, has been tried, you know, I
think it totally will be vulnerable to AI if it isn't already.
But let me, let me come back to
the in-person idea that, that was part of the inspiration for
that and some of the other, these other
system. I proposed that, well, you know, suppose we accept
that, you know, once in a while, we
got to get off our butts and go to something in person for real,
and we make that, you know, preset a
regular date, you know, date and time, and it can be in one or
many places, depending, you know, the kind of
the geography doesn't matter too much. But you just
have to be a real person that goes
in and is there at a particular time, in a room like this,
by a particular deadline, right, or just outside
or something, right. So be in a place,
you know, by a designated time.
So you, at the time, you know, at
the deadline, you know, doors close, nobody else gets in,
but you, and you can leave, you can
leave anytime you want, but if you leave in the orderly fashion
in the line or whatever, you get one
digital token, one I was here token, you know, each, and this
could be, you know, kind of associated with
other events, a lecture, you know, other things.
The token just attests that, you know, this
corresponds to a real person that was there at
that date and time, right. So, but it
doesn't, you didn't have to show any ID, you could even,
you know, wear a costume, wear a mask,
so treat it as a Venetian carnival or something,
if you really don't want to, you know,
if you really care about anonymity, right.
But because you get these tokens as you
leave, you can't get in, get back in in the same cycle.
And in the next cycle, they're all fresh,
right, there's no connection from one to the other,
you know, if you, if you want to,
if you use these for voting or minting cryptocurrencies or
something like that, you know, you have to,
you have to show up each time if you, if you want to
refresh your, your personhood token, right. Yeah. Maybe
work is more, there are a lot of countries
where any sort of thing like this will
be very welcome for options and like. Perhaps. So, yeah.
Yeah. Yeah.
So, this is the big open question, right.
So, is this practical? Will, will this ever work?
Can the corruption risks be dealt with? Yeah.
So, certainly there's risks of
like corrupt group faking, you know, kind of
like we, I held this, the Sydenham party and a
thousand people attended, but there are a thousand
fake people, right. Of course, you know, kind of,
if you want to get this right, there
has to be evidence, photographic evidence and, you know,
in person, you know, kind of cross-checking, right.
That's details that I, you know, don't have time
to get into now, but, you know, I
see ways to do that. But yeah, you know, so there are these,
these risks and costs, certainly the, you know,
convenience costs to the people of going in person,
the cost of holding the events. On the
other hand, there, there's one, yeah, so sorry, I know I'm
out of time. There's one reason I'm actually
optimistic that this could work, because there's
been a form of institution that has been
getting real people to, you know, a particular place and
time fairly consistently across the globe for a
very long time, for thousands of years, which is
religion, right. Church, going to church of various
kinds, services or whatever the religion has to
be, happens to be, right. And, you know,
you know, the rewards are not very large or tangible,
usually. It's just, well, I go because I
believe it has utility, right. And, you know, like that kind
of thing, you know, there's also a, there's
also a law, a big tradition of these kinds of events being,
being doable at very low cost, right, if
you figure out how to solve those problems, right.
And then it, you know, then it becomes
a kind of cost benefit situation and, you know, kind of will,
will the people, you know, kind of see
enough benefit to, to manage the cost, right. So,
yeah, that the question is like, you know,
is this practical at all is totally open.
Another project in Zurich called EnCointer has for
a number of years been experimenting with this
kind of in-person thing with some success, not,
not massive success, but some success. So, as well,
so EnCointer is this, this other project, you
can look it up if you're interested. It doesn't do
quite exactly this. It does something a little
bit different, but it's that general idea. But this is,
you know, kind of still, these ideas are
still, you know, kind of in their early years and it
remains to be tested, right. You know, kind
of, could it, could it really work? But the promise,
you know, kind of the interesting idea is,
well, we didn't have to check any ID, right. And these
identities or, you know, personal proof or personhoods
are not disposable, right. You, if you
misbehave, you can lose one and be banned
and you can't get another one until the next cycle, right.
They might not send the police directly to
your door, but at least they're not disposable, right.
And so they're, you know, kind of trying
to, trying to navigate this privacy identity
balance. And, you know, again, we still don't
know if this, if this is achievable, really. But,
you know, I think we, it's something we
need to be thinking about and, and researching instead of
just giving up on privacy, like, like some
people or some companies would like us to. So,
okay. Well, sorry to go, go over a
few minutes. Yeah. Thank you. And so see you next week. We'll
go, we'll go deeper into privacy and anonymity
and stuff, especially anonymity next week.
