These subtitles have been generated automatically
Welcome to CS234. Glad to see you all here.
So, let me...
So, I will be...
As long as I remember, I will try
to record the lectures for anyone who misses and needs to catch up,
although I hope you will normally come in
person.
That's always preferred, especially because I like these...
Especially in this course, I like it to
be interactive.
I always want to hear your questions and
discussions.
So, what is this course?
Well, this course is about the way technology
interacts with society,
especially democratic societies like Switzerland and like many
other countries in Europe and other parts of the world,
at least that still fancy themselves democracies, even
if in some cases that's debatable, right?
So, how does technology interact with society?
Sometimes for the better, sometimes not so good,
right?
And that's in many ways, right? So, we'll
get into that in a minute.
So, first of all, let's just talk about
the course organization a little bit, right?
So, the main content of the course, well,
there's these lectures.
There are four sets of homework for assignments
over the course of the semester, each quite different in nature.
So, the details of each will be given
when we hand out the assignment.
But each assignment will basically be about using
a certain class of technology that's at least potentially,
at least people believe that it can be
useful for democratic society, democratic coordination, deliberation, things like that.
Each of them has limitations, which we'll also
be exploring.
So, the purpose of these assignments will be
basically some hands-on experience using certain technologies for doing the critical kinds of things that we do in democratic societies and exploring, well, how do they work well?
How do they work not so well? How
could we use them better? How could we potentially make them better in the future, right?
So, the real purpose of this course is
to take a break from our usual, you know, almost all of you are students in, you know, IC, taking a mostly computer science curriculum, which is mostly about, well, how do things work?
How do we build things? How do we
prove theorems about them?
Well, this course is kind of a break
from that. It's not about, you know, what can we build? How, what are the algorithms?
It's more about getting you thinking, well, what
should we build, right? How should we think about these technologies in relation to, you know, their benefits, costs, risks, and rewards for society, especially democratic society, right?
Yeah, and so the assignments are basically constitute,
you know, ways to get hands-on experience using, you know, different technologies that seem interesting and promising with their limitations for doing that, right?
So, more details about those will come. All
of the main reference page you should always pay attention to is the Moodle site.
So, every week we'll post readings for the
following week. You should always be already be able to see on the Moodle page, the readings, a couple readings assigned for next week, and some optional readings as well that you're encouraged to, but totally don't have to read.
They also relate to the topic for next
week.
So, always watch the Moodle page, and that's
where, of course, we'll be giving the details for the homework assignments during the semester.
So, the homework assignments will be responsible for
50% of the final grade. The other 50%, of course, being the final exam, standard final exam during the final exam period, written final.
And the written final being in, so, you
know, this being a course that's not the type of course where all the answers are hard and precise, correct or not correct.
You know, there will be some multiple choice
questions on the final, basically, to test whether you are paying attention in lectures, in the homework assignments, in the readings, you know, so just on what you're supposed to have read and experienced and learn through the course.
So, another big part of the final will
also be fill in, you know, short answer type thing involving, like, you know, more soft fuzzy answers where, you know, maybe there is a one precisely correct answer.
You know, examples of potential costs, potential benefits,
potential, you know, so, you know, questions where there might be, might be many arguably correct, arguably incorrect answer, but, you know, you won't be great on those, you won't be great on correctness, you'll be great on whether, you know, it's clear that, you know, you
were paying attention and you thought about, you
know, what the course is about, right. So, so, homeworks and final will be the, the, will constitute the final grade together.
What will be fair game, you know, on
the, just to be clear on the, for questions on the final will be what we talked about in lectures, what's in the readings, not every detail. You don't have to memorize every, you know, detail of all the readings, but it's important that you at least, you know, read them enough to get the gist of what's going on, learn the main content,
and, you know, you'll be able to get
the main ideas of the readings, right, because those are certainly fair game. And of course, you know, the homeworks that, and some of the homeworks will be actually three of the four homeworks will be collaborative,
meaning you'll be working using these technologies, but
you will be working collaborating with your fellow classmates in various ways. So, because this is, that's what this course is about.
Okay.
Yeah, so that's, that's the basic course structure.
So, let's see, we have two A's, TAs, PhD, TAs and several AEs. Are any of you here now? Probably not. I don't.
But anyway, you will quickly become familiar with
them over the course of the semester. You can use the ED discussion forums and email us, all the contact information and everything is on the Moodle page that you need. Okay.
Yeah, other, so any questions about these basic
logistics? Anything I didn't cover that's important?
No? Okay, good.
Okay, so on to the actual, the actual
topic, right? So,
so ever since computers were really invented and
became, became, you know, increasingly commonly available, even in the very early days,
it's been obvious that there's so much promise.
In particular, there's so many ways that, you know, computers and networking and, you know, can, in principle, change our lives and our society the way we interact for the better, in principle, right?
And one of the assigned readings for next
week by JCR Licklider, this is a very old, has anybody, it looks like you have seen this article before, right? Anybody else seen this article before? Out of curiosity? It's a classic, but from, goes way back, yeah?
So, you win the prize for having, you
being ahead of the game on that article, but yeah, so this was a early-minute visionary, writing this article, the computer as a communication device, in the early days of networking and computers, where, you know, computers were these big, big things that filled the whole rooms and, you know, only fairly big, rich institutions could actually afford them at all, right?
And networking was, you know, was this slow
stuff over phone lines, mostly, before the internet, as we know it today, right?
But, you know, even then, visionaries like Licklider
saw the promise of, you know, even though what you could do then is like, barely, you might be able to use your, using your text-based terminal remotely log on to another computer in the next city, you know, another mainframe that you had an account on, or you could get a sharing relationship with and, you know, very slowly type your commands to, you know, the other mainframes, things like that.
You know, nevertheless, Licklider saw, you know, so
much promise that, you know, he could tell that, well, you know, things will get bigger, better, faster, the computers will get smaller, what you can do with them will get bigger and better and faster, and, you know, he was absolutely right.
And he was envisioning, well, you know, where
might this go in the coming decades? And I think you'll be amused to see, you know, the aspects of that he got right, and the other aspects that he got totally wrong, you know.
So he wasn't right about everything, as you'll
see. But, you know, the big picture gist is, well, you know, clearly this technology is super promising and could completely transform the way we interact with each other socially, the way we communicate with friends, you know, colleagues, and the way we, you know, communicate for the purposes of, you know,
self-organizing as a society, making democratic decisions, debating
issues, deciding on issues, right, voting, things like that, right, the things that are, you know, supposedly, at least, you know, really important to how we live and affect, you know, what rights and freedoms we have and don't have, right.
So, so, yeah, so, you know, it was
obvious from the beginning that there was a lot of promise.
But, oh, let's, let's, let's, let's talk about
some of these promises.
And we're going to explore, you know, the
rest of the rest of the semester, we're going to be exploring a bunch of these promises, you know, the way in principle technology could be used to positively transform the way we work, the way society works, the way democracy works, right.
But, you know, there's obviously going to be
some downsides and risks and issues, right.
The reasons and ways those promises might not
exactly be achieved or might have already kind of let us down.
You know, so far I'm speaking very vaguely,
we'll get, you know, much more concrete later, but, you know, even from the early days of networking where, where, you know, you could, you could send a message, you know, and, and so next to it, next week, we'll
we'll talk about a little bit about some
of the some of the early broadcast communication tools like usenet.
So, you know, which, which came in the
in the 80s and you know, for the first time enabled people anyone to write a message that basically the whole world could see right this was the precursor to, you know, Reddit slash dot, you know, Twitter slash X tick tock
whatever you name it, you know, kind of
this was the first version of all of those right that let everybody have a platform right.
So, I'm going to, you know, fill in,
you know, the first.
So, you know, some of some of the
key promise, you know, so.
First of all, just raw communication giving every
anyone.
You know, the ability to communicate, you know,
in principle globally almost instantaneously with you know anybody else in the world who was to talk with you or you want to talk with right so being very generic for now but also also as part of that.
Giving anyone a voice or platform.
Right, so from a perspective of democracy. This
was one of the most important aspects of technologies promise right because before, before this development, you know, of course there was, you know, there was,
you know, there was mass mass media, you
know, books, the news, all of that but, but it was usually only you know the select few journalists would write who would, you know, write in those media or, you know, you know people the rare authors who would write books about this or that fiction or
nonfiction right.
It was, you know, the communication was few
to many. Right.
You know, unless you were in one of
those publishing professions.
You were no, you know, your normal expectation
is you you receive you read you listen, you don't, you know, you know, and then you maybe vote once in a while, based on what you hear what you discuss with your friends and stuff like that but you know just the voting the one bit, you know, do I like this candidate
do I like this initiative or not yes
or no on this initiative. Right that was kind of your expected societal output, you know, but you know, incomes, the computer as a communication device and everybody can instantly have a platform right so it's enabling everyone to speak and potentially be heard by everyone in the whole world right who might want to want to hear them.
Right, so we'll talk about that more.
Later but so let's just to start with
what what are some of the other promises of, you know, that that you would add to this list and, you know, and feel free to start on the other column.
And, you know, what might go wrong what
has gone wrong with some of these technologies. Yes.
Yeah, so like like what.
Yeah, yeah, so so.
So, automating all kinds of information based activities
like calculations like yeah, calculations databases spreadsheets things like that. Yeah, so.
Let me, you know, put that somewhat generically
under automation, right.
And this has of course continued right you
know spreadsheets were only the beginning, you know, in retrospect, but yeah, absolutely, they were a huge thing they indeed made a lot of things that are important to do especially in businesses, you know, tabulating your, your
your ledgers your accounts keeping track of things,
you know, calculating things you need to calculate, you know, accounting and everything else made a whole lot easier, right.
And then, you know, much more recently, you
know, kind of there were decades when you know spreadsheets were something that you normally kept on your floppy disk, you know, and your and then your hard disk on your local machine but then, you know, more recently
well we we now have the you know
online versions of all those you know Google Docs Office 360 and stuff and so. So now these spreadsheets and documents, you know, you can collaborate, you know, you can use as shared media and collaborate on these documents and
calculations and things with anybody around the world
right so that's, that's hugely enabling, you know, further enabling right.
So, so automation, you know, general coordination, right.
For all kinds of purposes.
So, yeah, and there's no denying that that
this is, you know, hugely important and enabling.
On the other hand, how if you are,
if you're discussing issues.
I don't know with your friends, either locally
or remotely or whatever but you're you're considering issues that might affect how you vote in the next election.
Do you put that on a spreadsheet. If
you do then then who knows to you, you know that that that might be it.
So my point is, you know, usually a
lot of that kind of automation is really good for things that you're doing in business or you know kind of keeping track of like you know following some rules or you know writing a program that can that can do something systematic right.
But if you want to like decide on
the the the future direction of you know your neighborhood or the law in your town or country right and decide how to vote.
Maybe you want, you know, there there is
technology there that's very useful but it might be a different set of you know technology and practices right.
So what would you, what kind of technology
platforms, would you most likely to use to discuss with friends other people, how to vote on some issue.
If you vote, yeah.
Those are media, for example, yeah, good.
So.
You, you'll, you'll see that lick lighter kind
of predicted social media but not in the way not exactly in the same way it eventually emerged much later in, in terms of Facebook and all the other similar things but yeah but you know social media emerged as a, as a, you know, digital
development of our social networks, you know, we
have friends online, you know, which might or might not coincide with our friends in real life, you know, and yeah, you know it's in various ways enables, you know, new forms of, well, interacting and discussing issues like, you know, how should we vote on this should be I'd be for against this or what, you know,
good, yeah, and for better or worse that's,
that's, that's really important we're going to look at social media in considerably greater depth later later in this course, but maybe just you know kind of thinking about it.
Just a little bit to start with, you
know what, what is good about what is so attractive about, you know, talking with friends about, you know, issues like this, using a social media platform, as opposed to the old fashioned way of getting together with them in a bar over beer or something and just discussing it in person.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, good.
Any time.
Any where, right.
That's a great way to put it.
And that's indeed hugely appealing and, and, you
know, of course is a, you know, if you really get into it. This can sometimes mean every time everywhere right you know always on your social media no matter, you know where you do right.
So, maybe you're really hooked in.
Can be, can there be downsides to this.
This only upside or yeah.
Sorry.
Yeah, yeah, maybe.
Yeah, maybe, you know, so, you know, one
one downside it can it can take. Yeah, take time from
to go some real life.
Interaction, right.
You spend all your time on on your
phone instead of actually ever meeting meeting your friends. Well, you know, it can be taken to an extreme and sometimes is. Yeah.
Mm hmm.
Yes.
Yeah, great, great. So, so potential exposure to
diversity, right, diverse people, diverse opinions, and so on, right.
So, the whole world is there for you
to communicate with anytime you want, right, not just your little neighborhood, but will you actually communicate with that right. Yeah, yeah, what were you going to.
Yeah, exactly. So, at least in retrospect, this
is, you know, one of the things that was not so much predicted that, you know, the fact that despite this opportunity to be exposed to the full diversity in practice what might happen is, is it actually
so.
So narrow, it might actually narrow our, our.
So, perspective make it make us
make us
see, you know, mainly content.
That we already agree with right.
Right, because it's, you know, it's the perspective
that are, you know, that are the prevalent immediately in our immediate social neighborhood, and that's what the algorithm is feeding us and it's what we react positively to right and so it gives us more of that right and so we get puts this might put us into feedback loops of really always
seeing, you know, more of the same right.
Yes.
Exactly. Yeah, yeah, so misinformation.
Yeah, you mentioned propaganda.
Sensationalism.
And yeah, there's a bunch of, you know,
negative effects, potential effects and actually observed effects that, you know, that this can lead to and you know we'll we'll get a lot deeper into this in the semester.
That's very important.
The gap between theory and practice, you know,
the ultimate diversity that we could be exposed to versus the, you know, sometimes extreme lack of diversity that we actually get.
Good. So, what else, besides on both the
pluses and minuses are right. Yeah.
As a negative. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. So, there's
huge opportunity for for, you know, technology to be used for especially mass surveillance right
to, you know, you thought you had privacy
ha ha ha ha right welcome to welcome to 2025 right.
Well, I'm still a believer in privacy but
I don't know maybe I'm an outlet. Yes.
Exactly. Yeah, yeah. So, expectation of being always
connected responsive.
Right. It becomes not, you know, not just
a privilege but an obligation. If you, you know, if I, you know, post my latest cat video, and you haven't liked it in five minutes, you're going to hear from me, you know, right.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
So,
and I'm going to go over here to
the, you know, kind of to the opposite side of that freedom of speech.
Because for many people, especially in the early
days of use net in lit lighter's time and for the decade since in the, you know, in the 80s and 90s when use net as I mentioned was was a big, big thing.
These, these platforms were designed for freedom of
speech to make sure that you couldn't censor them.
And they were successful in that way.
In many respects, we'll get into this more
right so, you know, so the technology show tremendous promise to help ensure protect our freedom of speech, because we could see we knew how we could build technology, uncensoredable technology.
And that actually, you know, kind of succeeded
as we'll get into right but, but it also kind of didn't right because yeah otherwise you wouldn't have said, you know, yeah, censorship has come back big, big time right.
And it's, it's actually become a, you know,
a very delicate and tricky balance, right.
Is a is censored to always bad is
freedom of speech always good. What's the, what's the balance between them. So yeah, this is very important and difficult, difficult problem that will will explore.
Yes.
So, is this is this on the good
column or the bad column. Okay, okay, so.
So, so this yeah so the, you know,
that that that time when you were, you were younger and some friends took photos at that party and you can't make them go away right, what up right. Yeah, so.
You know, you can't delete, you know what,
you know, what, what you think should be deleted right. On the other hand, there, of course there's a, there's a, you know, good column, you know, good side contrast to this right that.
There should be a historical record.
And ideally, you know, from a, you know,
just talk to a historian. Right. Historians perspective is well, you know, there should be a historical record. It should be reliably maintained it should be possible to look up, you know what people were saying what you were doing what
was going on in the past, and that
shouldn't be easily changeable falsifiable it should be reliable right and a lot of technological promise provides ways that maybe we could actually do a better job at maintaining historical record.
On the other hand, sometimes you don't want
to. Yeah.
Yeah, you mean, um, do like, like doing,
doing, doing what online, like what, what are.
Yeah, okay, so so providing generating content and
stuff like that on online. Yeah, so it's, it's a, in many ways it can be a source of income.
And even, yeah, employment, right.
It's become, you know, in a lot, a
lot of ways, well, you know, it's, it's become the livelihood of a lot of people, you know, creating content, or even, you know, working, working for on for things like, you know, Amazon Mechanical Turk doing doing this or that task that you know somebody online somewhere once once a bunch of people to do you know sorting
through these images in order to create data
to train that AI model or something. Yeah, that's, that's useful.
You know, potentially paid work. It's a way
to, way to earn a living. Yeah, absolutely.
Is there a potential negative side to this
class of technology. Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, great. All kinds of scams.
Financial scams of especially right.
There's, there's others beside that actually, you know,
we'll come we'll come later to.
To issues of like, you know, how well,
well, to a bunch of, you know, issues related to this but if, you know, if you are, if you are running a business that's reliant on
people all over the internet, you know, doing
random stuff for you. Well, are you sure how can you know that the people who are signing up are the people you want doing, you know, under the conditions you would like, right?
It's going to depend on what you're asking
them to do and, you know, what, what might happen, right? So, in, in particular, there's a, you know, one of the things that can happen is, well, you know, some,
you know, in some place where, where the
employment laws are very weak or not really enforced. Well, sign up a bunch of a bunch of, you know, people who aren't actually eligible like children to, you know, to do, you know, to do some of these
mechanical turk tasks or, or other, you know,
other, you know, people who are actually vulnerable and not able to choose for themselves or even necessarily understand what they're doing, right? So, so these can be exploitive.
An example that we'll get into a little
bit deeper is right. So anybody heard of capture farms?
Like spammers use them like, you know, when
they don't, when their generative AI isn't doing a sufficiently good job of getting them through the captures, you can just hire a lot of cheap labor from some country with weak labor laws to just have actual people
sell these catches and, and facilitate your spam.
And this can even involve children, right?
And that has been known to happen, right?
So yeah, it's a source of income, but is it supposed to be a source of income? Maybe not in all cases, right?
Good.
Yeah, what else can you think of? Yeah.
Oh, great, great. Yeah. So identity theft, misuse.
Exactly. Yeah. So that, that has become a
big problem. Now, it's also, it's kind of in retrospect, it's kind of surprising that it's such a big problem because, well, on the technology side, we actually have plenty of technology that addresses in print in principle addresses the identity problem, right?
So we have like cryptography, which knows how
to authenticate people and, you know, we, you know, it's not like we don't have technologies that, that address this, right? So, so authentication
and encryption for privacy protection, et cetera, et
cetera, right? We've got a lot of technologies that in principle address this, but somehow they manage not to.
So yeah, this is a, you know, without
getting too deep into that just yet, it's a, it's a huge issue. Another huge gap between, you know, the theory and the experienced practice, something like, you know, it's,
this can't still be a problem, but it's
a, it's a bigger problem than ever. Yeah.
Other ideas? Yeah.
This is another sort of anonymity.
Yeah, great, great. So anonymity and anonymity, right?
Mm hmm. Yeah.
Yeah, sorry.
Yeah, yeah.
Mm hmm. So,
so yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
I would, I would kind of add that
to, you know, a variety of exploitation, like, you know, kind of websites or businesses or anything that try to get vulnerable people, especially children, you know, and yeah, you know, and exploit them in some way.
And of course, this also happens on social
media too. Right. So it's a big problem with, you know, kind of creep stocking social media as opposed to stocking the physical neighborhood, right.
Yeah, so this is really important. Yeah, so
I wanted to come back to unpack anonymity a little bit more. So, from the very beginning, you know, from the early days,
you know, how they, how the early days
saw a very huge important connection between freedom of speech and anonymity and democracy. Right. How can you, how can you be truly free to deliver a big decision democratically and discuss where do we want our society to go.
If you can't express yourself freely. And how
can you express yourself freely without anonymity, without the ability to express what you want to express in a safe environment without worrying that, you know, if you say the wrong thing somebody's going to come track you down.
Right.
And there's actually there's a lot of legal
social and other precedent, strongly connecting anonymity as an important useful valuable part of democracy, especially the freedom of speech part right.
On the other hand, yeah, you know, for
a good reason anonymity is also in the right column, because it hides it basically serves to hide all kinds of very, you know, bad, often exploitive scammy, you know, otherwise, all kinds of bad behavior, right.
So, let me say, anonymity as in freedom
as in versus anonymity as in lack of accountability.
Meaning, you can get away with anything. Doesn't
matter how bad because nobody's going to find you. Right.
So yeah, we're definitely going to come back
to those two faces of anonymity.
Okay, so.
Yeah, so it's it's time for for our
break. So let's go ahead and
be back at 415.
Thank you.
Hey, welcome back. So, um, to continue this
introduction of the course I want to so, you know, what we already have up here is already a really good snapshot of a bunch of the issues we're going to be exploring through the course but let me let me distill, distill it and and make it a little bit
more concrete in some ways to so.
So some of the, so the key promises
right of technology, especially as pertaining to democracy. Right. As, as I see it. One is first of all, the potential inclusiveness.
Next week we'll start so in the other
assigned reading will start, we'll start asking the question. Well, what does what does it mean.
You know what how would you design a
test for whether a technology is supportive or compatible with democracy. What is democracy. What, what are the requirements of democracy.
And one of the right choir requirements of
democracy.
You know, as, as proposed by Robert doll
and a very famous political philosopher, political scientist is inclusiveness everybody should be able to participate. Right.
And the inclusiveness, the initial inclusiveness of technology
is one of the one of the huge potential advantages. So, namely the fact that, you know, modern networking is borderless.
It's global. Right. You can, you can communicate
you can access it pretty much anywhere now.
All the time.
And
available.
Access has, you know, increasingly become available to
well, almost everyone.
There are of course some exceptions and those
exceptions are important too, as we'll discuss.
Basically the inclusiveness of being able to communicate.
And in particular,
give everyone a platform.
Right. An opportunity to speak and be heard
not only in an opportunity to consume to read or hear what other people are saying, right.
And distilling, you know, some of the other
promises we mentioned, being able to ensure
that freedom is right. The freedoms required for
three decision deliberation, decision making so freedoms of speech.
Freedom of association.
At least in the US laws this is
this is, you know, tradition that's seen as equally important freedom to discuss.
And to associate with whoever with whomever you
might want to in in making your, you know, whatever decisions you make that might be relevant to democracy, relevant to how you vote or whatever right.
From, you know, very early days, it was,
you know, technology, this technology was seen as potentially very empowering to groups, people in groups that might traditionally have been marginalized in many ways, because,
you know, your opinion is not popular.
You know, go home and be quiet, you
know, might have been the traditional answer whereas in, you know, kind of this with this new technology, maybe you can find an online group of people who think like you who you can discuss and validate, you know, your ideas and and you know find some,
you know, some support, social support and an
understanding where you might never have before. Right.
So, freedoms of speech and association, you know,
with very, very fundamental and normally considered positive positive things for for democracy, right.
And,
so resistance to censorship right.
The internet was designed with resistance to censorship
as a very fundamental goal, right, seen as a positive thing, right.
And,
and we're going to explore these promises in
the context of a number of different applications, the usage modes.
So, we all, we, you know, we already
saw, you know, we already had on the list.
So, we're going to talk a little bit
about us net as the precursor to forums like Reddit slash dot, etc.
One to many, you know, broadcast communication publication
platforms.
We already have have social media on the
list.
We'll be getting into that plenty more.
But actually long before social media, there was
another interesting form of, you might say quasi
democratic practice that is very close to home for us academics, especially us, you know, career academics, namely professors, PhD students and stuff.
Namely, peer review scientific peer review.
So, somebody submits a research paper, they think
it's the greatest research ever it's totally going to solve whatever it's going to cure cancer I don't know what, you know, but what are your peers think about it.
Is it good science is it good, good
research should it be published in this venue. Right.
There's a there's a real social process that
has similar interesting similarities and differences to the democratic process process of deliberating about, you know, laws or, or initiatives and referendum right so so we'll be looking at that as you know another of
a variety of these kinds of, you know,
social social application coordination deliberation applications that technology is, is, you know, sometimes useful for and, you know, sometimes used for sometimes for better sometimes not.
But sometimes things go wrong. Right.
Um,
So, we will
look more specifically at online deliberation.
So, the kinds of things you might do
in a community a small scale community or large scale one to do a kind of town a virtual town hall kind of discussion, like, there's an important issue in your community.
You know, you have to deal with it
you need to set a policy make a decision, find a find a good path forward on some topic or other of you as a community as a group get together and actually discuss that not just is not just an up or down voted so big wide open space you've got to
get together and get together and get together
and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together and get together
and get together and get together and get
together and get together.
Now, we'll also look at applications that at
least in some, some, some niches are, you know, including some that are close to close to my own research.
very, very interesting.
So, you know, the, you know, post Bitcoin,
you know, blockchain cryptocurrency universe, right?
Decentralized finance and all that.
So, another very interesting area of technology
that has a lot of potential promise,
also has a lot of issues as well,
a lot of scams and, you know, things
that go wrong.
How many of you hold, you know,
have gotten any like Bitcoin or Ethereum or
something?
Or you program smart contracts or use them?
Okay, good, good.
A few, okay.
Yeah, so there's a lot of, you know,
interesting stuff
and, you know, upsides and downsides
in that whole application space.
Oh, I should mention perhaps most relevant
to this course, DAO's.
What are DAO's?
Some of you certainly know.
What's a DAO?
We'll come back to this, but...
No?
Okay, well, I'm glad to be able to
introduce you
to this concept a little bit later.
These are called, this is basically blockchain community
lingo for decentralized,
autonomous,
oops, not a very good job of writing
here,
organizations.
DAO is just stands for Decentralized Autonomous
Organization, right?
So it's a small kind of, you know,
niche sub community
in this world, but it's, you know,
both technically and socially very interesting one
because it's kind of an attempt,
an extreme attempt to embody, you know, human
organizations
and encapsulate human organizations
into a fully automated, you know,
everything lives on the blockchain
out in the decentralized universe kind of form,
right?
So as an extreme example,
it's an interesting thing to study.
We'll look at it a little bit, you
know,
as an application area.
Yeah, so these are just some examples of,
you know,
the space of applications we'll look at, you
know,
we'll use to look at some of these
promises, right?
Of course, we're going to look at the
risks
and downsides as well.
All of these promises have major failures as
we've seen.
So things like spam to start with, right.
any of you have heard the term sock
puppetry before? Yeah, but what is sock puppetry in your quick?
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, so where one online context
in which, you know, one of many online contexts,
but one very prominent one where this is
a big issue is on Wikipedia, for example. How many of
you have used Wikipedia? Oh, not everyone? Holy
moly. How many of you have edited Wikipedia pages
like attributed? Oh, good, good. Okay, good. Yeah.
So I don't know if any of you have tried to edit
the pages that tend to be hot topics
like just just try to edit the page about Donald Trump,
for example, right? For anything for good or
bad or any reason, right? You know, there are
certain pages that are going to be very
difficult to edit because they're super controversial, right?
And, and every single edit gets a lot
of debate behind the scenes on the top page, the page that
every this the secondary page that every page
has about the people talking about what edits we should
make or not make and why, right? And,
you know, in case of Wikipedia, it's it's been a perennial
problem, you know, this what they call pop
sock puppetry, I want to make this edit. Oh, and
I mentioned my friends have shown up and
are, you know, vigorously in support of my edit,
but it turns out these are just, you
know, pretend I have a sock on my hands. These are these are
just different versions of me because, you know,
because I signed up for five or 10 additional
Wikipedia accounts to, you know, to so that
the virtual me's can support me in my, in my edit war,
right? So just one of many examples. So
this is a this is a big category of issues that we're going
to explore in, you know, in various ways
in the context of these different applications.
Um, is it closely related to this, the
problem of identity,
whether strong or weak,
versus anonymity,
anonymity as a good thing or anonymity as
a bad thing, right? So,
anonymity as a freedom fighter versus anonymity to
hide the bad guys lurking in the dark,
wanting to do bad things, right? Yeah.
We'll, we'll get to there. Yeah. Um, things
like, well, your IP address is a weak identity.
Your phone number is a slightly stronger identity
and your passport is an even stronger identity.
There's a big gradient, but yeah, so, but
that's, you know, the strength of identity or lack thereof
is one of the important, really critical issues
around, around this that we'll get into. Yeah.
And of course, you know, misuse of identity
as we already saw, misuse, theft, etc. Right.
Poers it.
Can I pay you to use your identity
to support my ends instead of your own, right? Because
you need the money and you're willing to
do what I ask you to do, right?
So that, that, you know, even if you
keep your identity, I'm not outright stealing it,
but you're using it, you're using your identity
on my behalf instead of your own, right? Even.
So that's, that's could be classified as a
form of coercion.
Yeah, so well, we'll, we'll look into these
issues. But also,
this is closely related, of course, to misinformation.
We'll we'll get into
Ah, yeah.
So the issue of bias
and
tribalism
when I mentioned the term post-truth.
Are we living in a post-truth world?
Right, I mean, here in Switzerland, maybe a
little bit,
I think here people tend to still believe
in evidence
and that there is truth and there are
true things
and untrue things a little bit more than
other countries,
like the one I'm from where it often
feels like
nothing is reliably true or false anymore.
It's only, there's only what people say, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, very good point.
And we will get into the different flavors
and strengths of anonymity,
including concepts like accountable anonymity.
The technology that exists that in principle,
if we could use it the right way,
could protect strong anonymity
while ensuring that that strong anonymity
can't so easily be misused to do all
kinds of bad things,
right, to disrupt, right?
So yeah, that whole space is close to
my own heart
because I'm one of my hats I wear
as a privacy researcher.
And so my group has done a lot
of research
in privacy and anonymity technologies in particular.
And I feel like the technology is totally,
this is in a way a solvable problem.
It's just that we haven't actually gotten
the solutions deployed, right?
But yeah, so that's a very interesting
and complicated space.
Yeah, so, so,
these are some of the persistent issues of,
the ways that these very promising aspects of
technology
somehow always go wrong and fail to fulfill
the promise.
And I'm still an optimist.
I feel like we can, many of these
problems,
if we put our minds to it
and we can probably figure out ways to
fix
or at least do better than we're doing
now,
but we have to be actually thinking
about those problems in that way.
So we have to take the responsibilities
as engineers, computer scientists,
or however, whatever you're gonna do after this
to think not just about how we built
this,
but should we build this and how to
design it
so it'll actually be more likely,
more easily, readily usable as a force for
good
rather than a force against freedom and democracy.
So that's one of my personal objectives
for teaching this course to my hope to
get you all thinking
about these things.
Yeah, so that's basically a snapshot overview
of what the rest of the course is
gonna be about.
Any other questions about these topics
or the course logistics or anything else relevant?
Yeah.
There will be four.
A varying size, so the reason I've been
so vague
is that they're all four of them are
totally different.
The purpose of having the four is to
let you spend some time
working with four very different,
contrastingly different technological tools
and processes and stuff.
So one will be about using a tool
that we typically use
for scientific peer review to introduce you to
that process,
a tool called HotCrap, the greatest name ever.
Anybody heard of HotCrap before or used it?
Anybody?
If you've done an internship at a research
lab,
you might have, but otherwise it's unlikely
at your current stage.
Another of the homework will be using Ethereum,
Samfield, get into this blockchain cryptocurrency universe
just a little bit if you happened already.
Another, the largest and last homework,
which will last for several weeks,
will be basically doing a mini deliberation
using one of these online group deliberation tools
intended to help communities discuss issues online
that might affect your community
and try to make a decision.
And you'll use that to do that.
A discussion in Teams and eventually do presentations
on do some research, decide on something affecting
you,
affecting EPFL, whatever you want,
and do presentations on that.
So that'll be later in the semester.
So again, all the details will come later.
The assignments will have different amounts
of work involved.
None of them will involve inordinate amounts of
writing
or doing and I hope they all should
be fun regardless.
What are the exercises for our video?
Sorry?
What are the exercises for your video?
Yeah, so the session, yeah.
So the exercise session,
so the two other weekly sessions,
well, the exercise session is only,
we will only use it formally
when we've handed out a homework
and you might need time and space to
interact with the TAs
and ask questions and stuff.
So the TAs will announce when there's an
exercise session
where you'll have the opportunity to use it
to both ask the TAs questions and or
coordinate
in your teams on this particular homework.
There's also the other weekly session
for unsupervised coordination,
which is TAs are not going to show
up there
and you don't have to either.
Nobody needs to show up there.
It's totally up to you,
but it's a time and space for you
to use if you want,
maybe with your teams to work on the
homework
or whatever.
So it's just a time and space that's
available for you
if you want it,
but it's totally up to you how you
use it if at all.
Yeah, good, yeah.
Yes.
Sorry?
Yes.
So it's over the high bit is basically
50-50
between the homeworks and the final exam.
Within the 50% for the homeworks,
I would have to look back at the
exact distribution.
So we've scaled the grades for each of
the homeworks
basically based on how much time they typically
take.
So they're not equal time.
The fourth one is by far the largest,
both in time and in the proportion of
the grade
that it counts for.
And I think the third one is pretty
small and quick.
Like, it'll just take you probably a few
hours.
So they vary it.
Okay, any other questions?
Okay, if not, yeah.
So read the two assigned readings for next
week
so that we can hopefully have a good
discussion
about both Licklider's vision
and Robert Dahl's philosophy of what democracy means
and what his requirements are.
And so I'll see you next Monday.
Thanks.
