These subtitles have been generated automatically
Okay, so we've been kind of alternating somewhat between different types of technology and democracy
and society topics.
Last time you got a dose of election
methods, which is so, and you could say we're continuing
in this topic of influence.
You know, different ways of measuring and accounting
for influence.
And you know, before the, you know, before
election methods, Sylas talked about peer
review, which is of course a topic of
one of your homeworks, which is, you know, one
way to that we in practice, you know,
measure and account for influence.
And then, and then election methods are, you
know, one of the traditionally most democratically
central one, like how do you actually count
votes.
And as you saw, you know, the kind
of the naive traditional naive way of plurality voting,
you know, that election, election methods are experts
aren't aren't agreed on much,
but they're they tend to be agreed on,
on, you know, one principle that plurality voting
is pretty much the worst possible system.
And then there's the, you know, as better
options, there's all of these others that
you've got some, some taste of.
And so part of the part of the
point there is just that actually, you know, in practice
making democracy work in whatever framework is complicated.
And there's a lot of, you know, tough
design choices online or offline, and with different,
different constraints.
So so so this week, I want to
move, move back a little bit to a to the modern, you know,
more recent technology focus and talk about talk
about blockchains, right?
Smart contracts.
And doubts, which has been for the past
decade or so, a veryingly quite hot and interesting
topic.
Many of you have have some familiar idea
with like Bitcoin, Ethereum smart contract systems,
Dow, stuff like that.
Yeah.
Good.
So before I before I get into that,
though, I want to, I want to actually let me kind
of out of order.
So I'm kind of a map of what
I see as phases of decentralized
systems kind of excitement in the broader broader
society.
Right.
So there are there have been a few
times over the past decades, since basically distributed
systems became a thing that, you know, some
new technology appeared.
And, you know, for a few years, a
lot of people in some cases, everybody was super excited
about this new technology, and it's going to
transform and democratize everything.
I've, you know, mentioned this word democratizing.
And each of these phases, you know, the
claim this this technology is totally going to democratize,
you know, society and stuff, you know, has
been rolled out in different forms.
And well, you know, in each case, there,
there have been, you know, some really legitimate
interesting promise and stuff, but also some severe
limitations.
So we've all already talked about the first
phase.
Right.
What is it?
So I talked about it in the first
lecture.
I mentioned this massive system that for a
while really took over as the one new and
really kind of the only way to give
everybody a platform to message anyone they wanted to
have a platform in a public forum where
anybody in the world could read what you write and
you can have discussions with everyone.
And as some of the readings I gave
you back in the first couple lectures pointed out,
this was a lot of people for some
good reasons thought, well, this is totally going to revolutionize
society and they always meant in a good
way, kind of usually it didn't occur to very many
people that, oh, could this revolutionize society in
a bad way?
Well, fortunately, I don't think Usenet broke the
world or democracy or did anything particularly
bad.
It failed to live up to some of
its perceived promise, but it didn't.
As far as I know, it didn't break
too much.
Well, so that's phase one, kind of distant
history barely even remembered.
How about phase two?
Maybe some of you might have been a
bit more familiar with it or at least heard of it.
Decentralized systems that kind of took the world
by storm and a lot of people were super
excited and like this is the biggest thing.
There's a little more narrow, but yeah.
They can go.
Great.
P2P, peer to peer.
Excellent.
Yeah.
So remember how this started?
Napster, yeah.
Basically file sharing.
Yeah.
So, specifically, kind of the killer app that
started and kind of drove this was file sharing
of technically illegal MP3 audio files, all your
favorite song, kind of the Spotify before Spotify.
Yeah.
And so this, of course, led to, so
this kind of, you know, the idea of distributed and
centralized systems was, you know, around plenty and
research and hobbyist practice plenty before
then, you know, and it never stops since
the Usenet era.
But, you know, this kind of killer app
that got so many people's attention, you know, and like, it was also a
cultural thing, right?
In that a lot of people were very
aware that these big record labels were doing, you know, had some really
bad practices that a lot of people hated
practices that were bad for, you know, certainly for consumers,
also bad for artists.
And a lot of people were fed up
with this.
And this was a way, okay, use decentralized
systems to get around these horrible record labels and their
horrible policies and, you know, get the music
we need and stuff like that.
So that was kind of a driving killer
app.
But it led into a more general, you
know, excitement about peer-to-peer decentralized technology.
It wasn't at all, you know, excuse me,
wasn't at all specific to file sharing or music.
This led to a lot of research on
distributed hash tables or DHT.
Who's heard of DHT before?
Okay.
Good.
So in a couple of years, take my
ACS 438 course and you'll get deep into these kinds of things.
So distributed hash tables, decentralized technologies to try
to, you know, scaleably manage a large amount of
data and do efficient searches.
This led to things like BitTorrent, efficient data
dissemination protocols,
a lot of things around there in research
as well as practice.
And, you know, what we, what has developed
into some somewhat popular interplanetary file system,
which gets still is used quite a bit.
And, you know, some of these technologies are
used in much more, much more recent systems.
And anyway, the list goes on.
So for a while, you know, everyone was
like, you know, was a lot of people were super excited about peer-to-peer in general.
It's going to revolutionize, you know, the internet,
the world.
It's going to democratize everything.
Of course, it didn't quite live up to
that promise either.
But, you know, and it ran into some
serious limitations that I don't need to get into a lot.
But then, you know, not fairly close on
the heels of that comes phase three, right, which you can probably guess.
Bitcoin, you know, the whole blockchain thing.
Smart contracts and so on.
Decentralized finance, Dow, and so on, right.
So no chance we're going to have time
to, you know, talk about all of this now, but, you know, just kind of a kind of a high level roadmap.
These are, you know, some of the high
points of, you know, the types of technologies that have, you know, kind of really caught the attention, not just of, you know, computer scientists, researchers, hobbyists, but the broader world with a lot of promise.
And so, yeah, so now let's focus on,
let me just, uh,
Yeah,
I'll do that later when I figure out
how to do it easily. Yeah. So let's focus on, you know, this, this most recent phase of
interest in, you know, blockchain, blockchain systems.
Right. So, uh,
Just to give you brief context.
So Bitcoin
came out as a paper and basically an
open source project in released in 2008 from some pseudonymous from some mysterious pseudonym that went by
Satoshi Nakamoto, right?
And to my knowledge,
still no one knows exactly who, you know,
no one knows for certain who Satoshi Nakamoto is. Any of you know.
I have a, I have a couple of
colleagues who think they have a pretty good guess at who it was based on, based on the style of writing, the style of work and some personnel familiarity with, you know, someone who's
had a very strong kind of similar fingerprint
of expertise and style. But that was never confirmed because this particular person passed away at some point before, before, you know, anything could be confirmed.
So, um,
So the best guess I've heard is that,
you know, Satoshi Nakamoto used to be a very, uh, confident, you know, research practitioner, but who passed away a while ago and, you know, it's literally not around.
Um, but, uh, and of course there's plenty
of spec speculation why he or she chose to be anonymous and never come out. Yeah.
Sorry.
I, I, uh, my colleague mentioned the name
once. I forgot. And I did not know this person closely myself. This was kind of an indirect. I had heard the name once or twice before, but I was never personally familiar with this. This person is kind of a, yeah, contact a colleague of a colleague thing.
Um, I trust the colleague of mine that,
you know, he probably had a pretty good guess. That doesn't mean he was right, but I trust that, you know, he was really in the thick of this. I kind of trust his judgment that he was not too likely.
He was quite, quite likely right. But, you
know, I didn't grill him on it. And, you know, especially since the person in question was already passed away, you know, I didn't, didn't really push further. And I forget the name. I'm sorry.
Definitely isn't this, this turkey out there who's
been claiming to be Satoshi Nakamoto for years. So, you know, that's not too hard to guess.
Anyway.
Okay. So, but, you know, more importantly, you
know, in the big picture, you know, he came out with this really interesting idea, which was, which kind of, you know, if you're not familiar with, with Bitcoin and the Bitcoin architecture.
I'm not, you know, I'm not going to
try to explain the whole thing now, but just give a few highlights that are worth knowing about and understanding.
It basically addressed four key distributed systems.
Challenges.
All in one kind of beautifully tightly designed
system.
These are the all four, tough, tough, non-trivial
challenges. And it addressed, you know, in some way, all four of them in a very innovative and creative way.
Right. So, one was the consensus or agreement
problem.
How to get a set of nodes in
a distributed system talking to each other to agree on a common value on a common history.
Even if, even if some of the nodes
might misbehave or die at any time, but so agree on a common sequence of events for whatever purpose.
This is what's known as the consensus problem.
And if you haven't already in future algorithms class, you'll get deep into this.
And it's a very, you know, deep interesting
problem.
And Bitcoin was a very novel solution to
that problem.
Very, very unconventional.
Second, it's a, it's a, basically a civil
resistance mechanism.
And we haven't talked a lot about this.
We'll talk about civil resistance more later. But what, what it, for those of you know what it, what is a civil, the civil problem.
I'm sure some of you, even those of
you not familiar with blockchains might have heard this term.
No.
So, so this, this name comes from a
computer science paper called the civil attack.
By John Deucerre at Microsoft Research.
But that paper in turn, so look up
that paper, it's a classic.
That paper in turn was, was inspired by
a historical case of in psychology of multiple extreme multiple personality disorder.
So Sybil was a pseudonym for a psychological
case, someone who had 20 some personalities all in all in their head.
Very distinct. And, you know, there was a
famous study of this, this multiple personality disorder case.
Anyway, so that case basically inspired this problem,
which is that I on the internet by default, identities are kind of infinitely disposable and you can have as many identities as you want.
Right. You can, you can be as many,
you can have as many personalities as you want, if you, if you care to or have a reason to.
And it turns out that, you know, kind
of this, this problem, you know, makes a lot of things in distributed and decentralized systems really, really hard to do, especially, well, you know, considering anything involving voting on the internet.
Well, if you can have an unlimited number
of identities, well, you can have an unlimited number of votes. If you want to, if you want to cast more votes in a given vote, you know, to tip an election or, or, or manipulate a manipulate page rank or something like that, just, you know, have, have more identities and more webpages, more or whatever, more of whatever that has voting power, right.
And well, you know, you're, you're set. Right.
So, so this is a, you know, a very general problem and Bitcoin had a, again, had a, you know, kind of unique and very interesting partial solution to it.
Right.
It also was a, had a, addressed the
problem of maintaining a large scale.
Distributed ledger.
Maintaining a, maintaining a history, like a document
among a bunch of, a bunch of parties.
And finally, kind of the crowning achievement that
wrapped all of this up together, basically the first successful cryptocurrency.
The first form of digital cash that was
kind of self-maintaining.
Whoops.
And incentive incentive compatible enough that people actually
used it and, and that would value in it and it grew.
Right. So.
And so this is where, where Bitcoin, you
know,
Bitcoin, the coin, the currency comes from, right.
Yeah, so.
Let's see how.
Yeah. So I don't want to get too
deep into the technical details of how it works.
How many of you have, have seen in
some, some sense the, like, you know, Bitcoin blockchain ledger structure and the basic, basic function.
Anyone?
Yeah.
Well, maybe just as a kind of very
quick high level overview, just looking at the Bitcoin ledger, because getting the basic concept is really, really very useful and kind of.
Kind of necessary to understand the interesting, the
interesting things you can build on it.
So again, without getting into too many details,
what goes on in Bitcoin is well, and many blockchain systems is whenever it's when it's founded, you know, in this case, this happened in 2008, you know, led by Satoshi.
You know, somebody, the founders create what's called
a Genesis block, which is just a piece of information that's, you know, hard-potage, you know, the developers hard-code say, okay, this is going to be the Genesis block.
There's, there's a little bit of cryptographic magic
that I'm glossing over there.
But it's just that, you know, the developers
are going to say, okay, this is the beginning of the history that we're going to create the ledger.
So.
And then what we're, and then the important
thing is we're going to set up, create a consensus.
in the case of Bitcoin, typically about 10
minutes
after any block is, so this is approximately
10 minutes.
Another block, a second block gets created.
This has what we call it a hash
chain,
a hash link back to the first block
using a cryptographic hash.
We don't need to worry about the cryptographic
details now.
It just basically ties the structure together.
And then, approximately 10 minutes after that,
somehow magically so far as I haven't explained
it,
another block appears.
And all of these blocks have some information.
In this case, it's gonna be Bitcoin transactions
in a structure, a cryptographic structure we call
a Merkle tree,
but don't worry about these big details for
now.
That's what you'll get deep into if you
take CS438 later
or other similar courses.
So each of these basically, logically adds an
entry
to a big logical ledger.
So here we have the Genesis block, the
first block,
and then block one, block two, and so
on, right?
Gradually growing over time and basically write only,
right?
Once something is on the ledger, the idea
is you never change it.
You only add more blocks.
But the really interesting thing about how Bitcoin
tries to do this
is, well, we're used to centralized parties being
responsible
for adding these blocks.
Well, Bitcoin said, well, we want thousands of
participants
to be able to collaborate in this and
have some kind of combination
of competition and collaboration.
A co-operative kind of game going where everybody
participating
is gonna actually compete to add a new
block, right?
And so each successive block might get added
by a different participant, a different miner,
as we call the core Bitcoin participants now.
And again, without getting into details,
to be able to add a new block,
each of these blocks contain a solution to
a little cryptographic puzzle,
which uses hash functions.
In the case of Bitcoin, there's other more
recent variants of this
that other cryptocurrencies use.
But basically, in order to earn the right
to add a block,
you have to basically do some entirely useless
work whose purpose is only
to prove to everyone in a way that's
easily and quickly
and cheaply verifiable that you have done that
particular amount of useless work.
That's its only purpose, right?
And as Bitcoin evolved, basically, it very quickly
became energy
and computation limited.
So people started deploying these giant racks of
data centers
full of specialized hardware just for Bitcoin mining.
And it basically becomes a power and electricity
and cost of power limiting thing.
And so participation is basically amounts to,
well, whoever's willing to invest to waste the
most power
with the right resources to solve these otherwise
useless cryptographic puzzles
is who gets to add the blocks, right?
And this is a random statistical process.
So each block is, with some probability,
going to be added by a given participant
in proportion to their current share
of investment in mining power, right?
How much of this crypto puzzle solving power
they're bringing to the table
in comparison with all the other participants?
So at the time, it was like this
was a very novel way
to do a consensus algorithm.
Consensus algorithms had existed for decades before that,
but they were always kind of a closed
environment.
We assume there's a particular closed set of
end-nose
and assume that there's a threshold T of
them are good
and kind of make an algorithm that can
operate in that environment.
But, well, Bitcoin, using this crypto puzzle thing
which we call proof of work, right?
Now, what's the main reason, you know,
that Bitcoin used proof of work instead of
just a standard,
say, T of N threshold argument?
This had a key benefit that Satoshi Nakamoto,
whoever he or she was, was after, right?
Why would you, you know, ask people to
just waste power
doing stupid useless activities just to prove
you have a right to add a block?
Yeah?
Yeah, so that's the absolute...
So in order for this to work, technically,
you have to have rate limiting.
If there wasn't this rate limiting mechanism there,
basically it would be a free-for-all.
Everybody would constantly be adding new blocks
and the blockchain would have no time to
resolve
into anything meaningful, right?
So, yeah, you're absolutely right.
You've got to slow down the process enough.
So, you know, this protocol works only, you
know,
again, glossing over all the details.
This protocol works only if each time a
block appears,
usually there's enough time for that block to
propagate
and be known to everyone before the next
block
is likely to appear.
You know, there's a bunch of probabilities things,
but, you know, when that doesn't happen,
there's occasional races, but races aren't a big
deal
in the long term.
As long as most of the time, you
know,
you've got this rate limiting.
So, yeah, from a technical perspective,
to make this work, yeah,
you need that rate limiting to kind of,
to the speed of the network.
On the other hand, well, you could also
have a rate limit
just by saying, well, each of the nodes
is supposed
to start a timer for 10 minutes
and not propose a block until 10 minutes,
right?
Yeah.
Also, if some of you were,
they don't have any interest in the process,
Yeah, great. So this was a way to
make sure that participants have skin in the game, as
we say, like you have to invest something
first to, you know, basically doing this useful
work, useless work, just to prove that you're
motivated enough to invest this. And then hopefully
by the time you've invested enough, the more
you've invested, the more you hopefully don't
want the whole system to come crashing down.
So hopefully your incentives are now aligned
with the incentives of the overall Bitcoin system,
right? Now, unfortunately, you know,
as we later learned, you know, this incentive
compatibility argument kind of works, but does
not work perfectly, right? There's a lot of
kind of subtle gotchas in there that are that's also
fascinating reading, but it also kind of works.
It's really interesting. Yeah. But beyond this,
right? So so you could also just code
into, you know, each of the nodes software, a
some requirement that says, well, you know, before
you can join this protocol, you have to,
I don't know, pay Facebook a million dollars
to become an official node. I don't know if any of
you remember when Facebook tried to start a
blockchain project and, you know, where I think
a million dollars was the was the entrance
fee, right? To start a node. You know, this is kind
of the consortium blockchain thing that sometimes work,
right? You know, you could have a different
way to get in to create that cost
and just say, okay, and then once you're in, you're on the
the register and you use a classic consensus
protocol, everything else works fine. You don't
need this proof of work thing then. But
what's the there's a third reason that proof of war,
that this crypto puzzle solving proof of work
was especially interesting for Satoshi. And it was one
that strangely enough, Robert doll might actually get
behind. Yeah.
Well, no, I mean, the the proof of
work doesn't itself doesn't let you do that. The proof of work,
you know, rate limits and, you know, insurers
that the creation of blocks doesn't get out of
control at a, you know, at a rate
perspective, you know, but all independent of the proof of work,
all the miners have to check each other's,
you know, whenever they're receiving and sending
blocks, they have to very carefully check, you
know, all of the all of the blocks, all the
transactions do a lot of checking to make
sure everything is valid. And that's totally independent
of the of the proof of work, the
proof of work is just one tiny piece in there, right? Of course,
that has to be checked. But it's one
of many things that has to be checked to validate the
structure of the blockchain and, you know, make
sure other nodes are, you know, doing what they're
supposed to. And all the nodes are constantly
doing this when they're when they're exchanging new
blocks and new transactions within blocks and stuff
like that. So, so yeah, the verifier, you're
right that the verification is really important. But,
but that they have to do that regardless
of proof of work or something else. And
the proof of work is, you know, not really,
you know, that essential a component, you can
do that checking without having proof of work in there,
right, as the as the as the gateway
for creating a new block, right? But in a way, you know, the
the motivation for the group of proof of
work, like as I just mentioned, you know,
sounds very Robert doll-esque in a certain way,
right? It's right. It's pursuing one of his principles.
This is democratization in technology, at least an
attempt.
Which Prince, which of dolls principle do you
see reflected in this desire?
Not one person, one vote, I'll give you
that. Definitely not. Yeah.
Yeah, yeah. So, so it's not it's not
one person, one vote, it's one compute cycle,
one wasted electron, one vote, something like that,
right? But there was another of his principles,
right? Inclusiveness. Right. From a broader definition of
inclusiveness, the idea, you
know, Satoshi, what Satoshi wanted was a decentralized
system that anyone could join,
right, without asking anybody's permission. So, we've also
come to use the term permissionless.
To describe this, right? You want to join,
you just join and start running the protocol. Yeah.
Ah, yeah. Well, great, great question. But this,
but, but spoken from a, from a so, you know,
2025, you know, you know, 18 years after
Bitcoin, you know, spoken with such great,
you know, kind of retrospective insight to what
actually happened, right? So,
this isn't what Satoshi was thinking, you know,
because, you know, he couldn't or didn't predict
you know, what, how Bitcoin would actually evolve,
right? He, you know, kind of the purpose of this
was inclusiveness, you know, he wanted like, you
know, any, anybody to be able to run,
run the protocol without anybody permission. Yeah. Later,
it developed that, especially as,
as, you know, people get, got really deep
into this and started optimizing the proof of work and
building custom hardware and stuff. You got these,
started getting these enormous differentials
between the people who had the right hardware
and could mine efficiently and those who didn't.
And then, yeah, indeed, it, you know, the
inclusive argument went straight out the window,
you know, not that many years after, after
Bitcoin, you know, came down, right? But inclusiveness was
one of the key, intense, you know, it
was, it was one of the goals. He was, he was after
inclusiveness and permissionlessness, even if, well, it totally
failed in retrospect, you know,
at least in a, in any kind of
egalitarian way, right? You know, you have to have, these days,
you have to have the right mining hardware
and access to, you know, all the right resources
and a lot of investment, even to get
into the game of, of mining Bitcoin, right? Because of this,
but, you know, Satoshi didn't predict that. But,
you know, there's, there's the, you know,
the intent and there's the difference in how
things actually evolved. Yeah.
Yeah. Good question. Yeah. Yeah. So that is
a very, that is another very deep and interesting
question that, you know, for which the answer
is unfortunately complicated. But I mean, the
simple version of the answer is that this
particular type of useless work, you know, the, the nice,
useful property of it, useful from a protocol
perspective, the useful property of it is it's
very cheap and easy to verify that that
useless work has been done. The moment you try to try to
start changing the work into useful work, right?
We'd all love to replace the useless work with you,
useful work. Everybody agrees that the problem is
then you start have to defining well, define,
well, who judges what work is useful and
what work is useless? How do you define useful work? How do
you judge useful work? Right. And then you
start immediately getting into major circularities in
the problem definition. Who judges that? Well, let's
maybe form a committee of judges. Okay. Who,
who forms that committee? Oh, it looks like
we need some judges to form that committee. And
how do we pick those judges and, you
know, stuff like that, right? Of course, there's also, you
know, computer scientists who want to come, come
up with a magic algorithm, a magic cryptographic
primitive that will somehow cryptographically identify separate useful
work versus useless work.
And there's, you can read some papers that
people trying to do something to that effect, but nobody
has come anywhere close to succeeding as far
as I know, right? In kind of making a, an algorithm,
a cryptographic primitive that can, you know, figure
out what, just differentiate some form
of useful work from useless work, right? So
yeah, that's, you know, exactly. You know, the goal is
great. Everybody is agreeing on that goal. Nobody
knows how to do it. Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, just, just pragmatically, you know,
from looking at, you know,
the world in operation and Bitcoin in operation,
yes, that's exactly what's happening, you know,
from an economic perspective, you know, Bitcoin is
just a way to convert wasted power into a form
of money, right? Now, well, I mean, the
thing is, this is only one of many ways to create money.
Economists have known all kinds of ways to
create money for, you know, many decades now.
And this is only, you know, kind of
one of the most recent and one might say one of the most
horrendously inefficient and, and also, you know, kind
of, it's kind of a climate disaster of a way
to make money, right? So, you know, compared
against all the other ways of making money,
this has become kind of a disaster, right?
But yeah, it is a way to make money. It's,
it is doing exactly that, right? Yeah.
Could it be like any other escalation to
legal or something?
This has been discussed, certainly, it is discussed
whether, you know, proof of work should be
outlawed. And I'm, you know, personally, I might
be in favor of it, you know, in part because,
well, you know, I've been outlining the original
Bitcoin, which is a super fascinating idea. But,
you know, since then, the algorithms have been,
have moved on. We have all kinds of much better
alternatives to proof of work. We do not
need proof of work anymore. Like nobody needs to,
or in my opinion, should be launching proof
of work cryptocurrencies anymore. And, you know,
the proof of work cryptocurrencies that are out
there should be moving to something at least
a little bit more responsible, like proof of
stake, not a, you know, I, you know, not a,
not a perfect solution either. I, you know,
wasn't planning to get it, you know, into that in detail.
But, you know, it, at least, you know,
it's a lot more complex, but it resolves this, you know,
totally useless waste of energy thing at the
very least, right? You know, so there are alternatives.
We don't need to do this, right? It
was just, it was just the, you know, simplest and easiest and
most beautiful at that time, you know, technical
solution to this, to this set of problems, right?
So, yeah, like, you know, if we have
the opportunity to outlaw proof of work, I might be on board with
that, you know, because it's, it's, you need
a horrendous way to make money despite the technical
appeal and that it had original. Okay. Yeah.
So, so, yeah, so that's, that's the basic structure.
You know, I had, you know, what I
haven't gotten into, of course, is how, how you turn this into a
cryptocurrency. You, you know, use this ledger as
kind of a record of who, who owns how many Bitcoin
associated with their public keys. I don't want
to get into that in too much detail because I want to
get, you know, move straight to some of
the higher level, you know, interesting things that, that
we've learned we can do with this kind
of ledger. However, you do this consensus and civil resistance.
But anyway, just keep this general, this general
picture, this general structure in mind, and this,
at least ambition of making a system that,
you know, kind of creates this agreement between a large
number of not mutually suspicious parties, which, you
know, Bitcoin was trying to do in an incentive
compatible way so that, you know, people can
be motivated to come and, you know, continue
contributing and also ideally in an inclusive permission,
this permissionless way, you know.
So, so there's some, you know, really, really
nice, at least goals bundled into this, into this
design. And so we'll, we'll continue looking at,
you know, some of the higher layers above this. So
let's take a take a break now and
then come back at 415 and we'll continue.
Okay, yeah, so, so let's continue. So,
I kind of, you know, I kind of
skipped over, well, I'm not going to have time to get that much into,
well, I kind of skipped over the details
of the coin part, you know, how transactions work,
which is also very interesting, but just don't
really have time. But
the next feature I'd like to highlight is
something that was already in Bitcoin, scripts,
and then Ethereum and other cryptocurrencies, blockchain systems,
pushed this a lot further into the smart
contracts.
Right. So,
so,
so I mentioned, so, you know, taking another
look at the, the basic, you know, a blockchain structure,
again, glossing over all the details. Let's say,
let's say, you know, you, you receive in your wallet,
you know, some Bitcoin, and that's going to
be, there's going to be a record for that, you know,
I'll say, you know, there's going to be
a record in one of these blocks saying,
Alice,
some, you know, Alice's wallet identified by a
cryptographic public key owns, say, you know,
0.01 BTC, right? Now, in the base case,
in this, there's the simplest way, way to use this.
So, you know, this, this amount of Bitcoin
that, you know, is on the ledger as belonging to Alice.
Well, anytime Alice wants to, wants to use
this, she can,
she can issue a spend transaction, and this
will, this spend transaction will go into some future block
under the right conditions. Say, here, you know,
here lay it into, you know, so this was in block one,
this is in block three, let's say, and
Alice is issuing a spend transaction, and she's going to,
she has to basically include this trend. So,
she's going to say, you know, just again,
simplistically say transfer to Bob, right? Transfer this
amount to Bob to pay for some
service or product Bob is providing her, right?
And so, Alice's spend transaction is going to
have another of these, these hash links back
to, you know, indicate uniquely the particular past,
you know, coin she owns and wants to
spend, right? But obviously, you can't just,
you can't just allow anybody to point to
a coin on the blockchain and say, hey, spend it, because
trust me, I'm the owner of that coin,
right? Well, are you the owner of the coin or not, right?
You have to prove that you're the owner
of the coin. Now, the simple way, you know, in the common
case, if Alice is the sole owner of
this coin, she typically does it, you know, again, using
simple standard cryptography now. She just uses a
cryptographic digital signature
with her, with her public key, her Alice
public key, which was, which that coin was originally
tied to. I'm not going to get into
the cryptography, but basically, you know, kind of,
is the way of authenticating her ownership of
the key. Now, the interesting thing that I want to get
to though, is that this, this is not
the only way, even in the original Bitcoin, this is not the only
way to, to authenticate, to, to determine, you
know, who has the right to spend a coin under,
under given conditions, right? So this is, this
is just the base case. Bitcoin also had an option
called pay to script.
Basically, when, when Alice received this coin, whoever
gives it to her, or, you know, she could
pay it to herself, if she wants to
attach, attach, you can take a kind of an ordinary coin and then
attach a script to it, you can actually
attach a little bit of code in there, in a magic little
scripting language that's, in this case, very specific
to Bitcoin. It has some instructions.
It's a small program, you know, in a
very blockchain specific restricted programming
language, but it's, it's code, it's arbitrary code
that you can embed right there with the coin on the
blockchain, right? And now, suppose a coin has
this, has this, has this script attached,
and Alice or somebody wants to spend it,
wants to create a spend transaction. Well,
it's in that case, it's, it's no longer
the case that just a single digital signature will work
to do that necessarily. Instead, it now depends
on what that code says, because the purpose of that
code is to decide in a given situation
whether a particular proposed spend is allowed or not, right?
The code is a program. So now, now
suppose somebody, you know, suppose somebody wants to,
wants to propose a particular spend transaction, I
would like to spend the coin. Well, you don't
automatically get the right to spend the coin.
Instead, what has to happen is your proposed spend
transaction, you have to send that into a
little virtual computer, which, and this script goes in
the side. That's the program, this virtual computer
runs the program represented by the script on the
input, which is the input is the proposed
transaction saying I want to spend this coin and the script
paying from the coin itself, it was attached
to the coin, and the script, you know, so this virtual
computer runs the steps of that script and
outputs, what do you think, what do you think its output is?
Not too complicated, exactly. Yeah, exactly. Yes or
no?
Right? Yes, it's authorized or no, it's not.
Right? So, um, yeah, but the script can be whatever you
want, whatever, you know, the owner, the original
owner, depositor of that coin wants.
Right? And so, you know, with some important
limitations, but, and so, so there's, it turns
out there's a lot of power to this
concept. Now, why would you want this? One of the earliest
motivations for this that was supported originally by
Bitcoin and has been ever since and is still
one of the, you know, common case uses
of this feature, just as an example, not a super interesting
example, but a very common one is what
we call multi signature wallets.
Right? Suppose you want to have a joint,
a wallet jointly in an organization with
several key holders, not just one, say three
key holders, and you want, you want to make sure that
no single key holder can empty the vault
all by themselves, but you need two signatures to spend
any money from this wallet, you know, so,
so, or, you know, you have a personal wallet, but you
want it to be, you know, as secure
as possible, and you don't want to trust any one of your
several devices completely. So, well, you split the
key across three devices, you hold, well, you
have three keys, one on each of three
devices, and you organize the wallet so that, you know, two of
the devices has to, has to be participate
in authorizing a spend, right? So this is just,
in some sense, potentially good security, right? But
one of the, one of the ways you can implement
that is basically by making a script that
has three public keys that it's going to, that it's,
that it's going to check against a proposed
transaction. So key one, key two, key three,
right? And when the transaction comes in, the
transaction is going to have three signature
slots, signature one, signature two, SIG three, right?
The transaction, you know, might have one,
two, three, or no, any number of these
signatures might be valid or invalid, cryptographically,
right? But what's, what the script is going
to do is just going to check, okay, is signature one
make correct signature for, for public key one
is signature two, a correct signature for key two,
is signature three a correct key for signature,
signature four with respect to signatures three,
right? So it's just going to, you know,
do the three cryptographic algorithms and add up the yeses,
you know? So how many of these checks
failed? And then do a final test, was this number of yeses,
was the number of valid signatures greater than
or equal to two? And then that is what produces
the final yes, no output, right? Namely, meaning
did any two of, were at least two of these signatures
valid? It's fine if one of them is
an invalid signature, as long as two of them are valid,
right? And then the script says yes, and
you know, this transaction is authorized, the spend
happens. If it's no, then, you know, the
spend doesn't happen. And the coin is secure against
being spent by, say, just a single signer
misbehaving, right? The minute, may it make sense?
So super simple, you know, example of a
script, but a very powerful basis, because, you know,
you expand, you can think of, you know,
how you expand this, and you can kind of do a lot of,
do a lot, a lot more things with
this concept. Now, you know, like I said, this was already
big, built into Bitcoin, it had some important
limitations,
things like determinism,
for technical reasons, related to the consensus, this
virtual computer has to be absolutely
deterministic. All of the instructions it executes have
to have one and only one possible answer
for any given inputs that everybody agrees on
very clearly, right? So you can't use a standard
instruction, processor instruction sets, because those are actually
have a bunch of
non-determinism where things aren't specified precisely.
There's, they have to have basically no external,
no outside world inputs.
The thing these scripts depend on is the
scripts can use as input the proposed transaction and
anything that's already committed to the blockchain, but
they can't go look at a website or, you know,
see what's going on in the external world.
So this is, because that would violate the determinism,
there could be multiple different perspectives on what's
going on in the external world and
agreeing on that becomes very hard, right? So,
but, and so this certainly limits what's, what
you've done, you can do with scripts. And Bitcoin,
at least, also had an important limitation in
a scripting language, no loops.
So there was control flow, but you could
have conditional branches in this code, but a conditional
branch can only be forward, never backward. Why
would this be?
You think of why Satoshi made this very
curious, curious and very limited, apparently very limiting
provision? Yeah. Recursion, yeah, yeah. So it could,
yeah, something with loops could be recursive
in weird ways. Can you see any danger
of that? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. So non-termination, like, you
know, if you make a loop, yeah, yeah,
you know, if you, if you can write whatever code you want,
well, it might be a non-terminating program. And
remember these scripts, you know, although I
haven't told you much about how this virtual
computer works, how it actually works is that all
the Bitcoin miners, as they're doing this complicated
process of checking all the blocks for validity,
one of the forms of checks they have
to do, each of the miners, when they're accepting any block
from anybody else, they've got to rerun that
script on their version of the virtual computer,
redundantly with the rerunning of the script that
everybody else is doing too, right? And check for
themselves that, yeah, okay, you know, this proposed
transaction, this miner claims this
proposed transaction is valid as part of a
block they're proposing, but to verify that they're not
lying, I'm going to rerun that script on
my version of the virtual computer and make sure
that, you know, if that miner said that,
claimed that this script says yes on that particular input,
I'm going to verify that that script indeed
says yes on that particular input. Therefore, I have
to run it to termination, right? And if
another miner could just send me a block saying, hey,
trust me, this script runs to termination, but
well, it actually doesn't terminate,
then I get into an infinite loop and,
you know, that's a nice DOS attack against me at the very
least, right? So, yeah, so, so this was
kind of, you know, the non-termination problem,
even if the script does terminate, maybe it
just takes a lot of CPU suck, and maybe it doesn't
terminate for a long time, right? And that
could be equally a problem. It can, you know, it can,
you know, basically cause miners to consume huge
resources, you know, that, and break the whole
incentive compatibility part, right? Yeah. Yeah, so there
is, in effect, the limit, I mean, yes
and no, the length of the code is
mainly limited by the size of a given transaction, right? And
the transactions are limited to whatever will fit
in a block, right? So there's a total limit of
the total number of bytes a block can
have, any transaction has to be smaller than that,
you know, and the script has to be
smaller than that, right? You know, and yeah, yeah, so,
exactly, yes. Well, and, you know, because there
are no loops, you know, the more you want to do in
a script, the more bytes you're going to
have to, you know, is going to have to be in your transaction,
and the more bytes you're going to have
to pay for it because that's actually, you know,
figures into the transaction cost too, you know,
so, yeah. So, so basically the new,
no loops provision was just a simple way,
you know, to deal with the non-termination issue and,
and the, you know, resource consumption, computational resource
consumption problem. Now,
now, you know, some, some years after Bitcoin,
a very interesting
project known as Ethereum came along, a Vitalik
buterin leading that really, from a technical
perspective, focused on, on this problem, right? So,
so Ethereum replaced the, you know, relax the
no, no loops restriction. So, Ethereum smart contracts
can have loops, but they had to introduce
this whole new, to replace it, they had
to create this whole notion of what they call gas,
which is basically an execution quota. So, you
can do, your scripts can do anything they,
they want, you know, including looping forever, only
they have a limited amount of virtual CPU
cycles that they're going to be allowed to
execute for. And if that, if they run out of gas, then,
then the miner, you know, kind of stops
validating and just says, okay, this is, this is invalid,
you know, and so, so yeah, there's a
technically not that hard solution to the no, no loops problem,
but even the Ethereum has it solved either
the determinism or no, no external inputs problem,
those are kind of harder, right? Anyway, so,
so this is, this is smart contracts in a nutshell,
quick overview, any questions so far?
Okay, so, you know, again, you know, a
technically deep and complex and interesting
topic worth, worth reading into, but, but finally,
I really want to get to, you know,
well, what can you do with smart smart
contracts? So, this is where things really get interesting.
So, I mean, you know, we're talking about,
well, at least in the case of Ethereum,
touring complete computation that you can, you know,
embed on a blockchain and attach to coins,
you know, so, so you can fund some
code on a blockchain that just kind of lives there.
And by the rules of the system that,
you know, can interact with whoever wants to interact with it
under the rules of that contract. So, very
powerful concept, very interesting. And this is,
this is manifested in a couple contexts. One
of the, one of the areas that gets a lot of
blockchain cryptocurrency people super excited is what they
call decentralized finance,
or DeFi. And without getting into a lot
of it, there's so, so there's a lot of different aspects
to this. So, so, so different forms of
digital coins, alternate currencies,
based on a huge variety of philosophies and
rules and things like that, some of them more
scammy than others, let's say, forms of digital
investment.
Right. So, what drives a lot of cryptocurrency
people, you know, is, well, this is a new way
of investing money and, you know, making money,
you know, kind of, and, you know, investing in
projects and things like that. Right. So, if
you've, so there was some, some phase, a phase where
who remembers the ICO phase where, you know,
for a year or two, initial coin offerings or ICOs were,
were all the rage trying to be the
new, you know, all digital substitute for IPOs,
initial, initial placement offerings, right, as a way
to start, launch startups,
private, you know, in innovation projects and things
like that. Then later came the NFT,
non-fungible tokens phase. So, any of you familiar
with the herd of NFTs? So, yeah, so these, these
kind of got a little bit more media
attention for better or worse, often worse.
For some of the, you know, crazy ways
they're, they're used, but basically just trying to be,
you know, digital tokens that are tradable and
that can mean anything. They can just be an image
of a crazy monkey or whatever, you know,
that some, somehow you decide is valuable and you want to
collect it. And so, as long as other
people want it too, and yeah, then it, you know, then has value.
This is economics, right? Anyway, so, you know,
there's a lot of, you know, kind of trivial
things you can do with this, but you
can also do very interesting things like decentralized exchanges,
things like automated market makers.
And, and, you know, one of the, one
of the basic ideas here is, well, you know, so we've got a bunch
of currencies, a bunch of cryptocurrencies, a bunch
of regular traditional currencies like
US dollars and Swiss francs, you know, can
we, you know, decentralized fashion like on a, on a
blockchain make, make a way to allow people
to trade between these different currencies at a fair,
you know, reasonable market value exchange rate, right?
And so, you know, a very powerful,
interesting idea is to, that actually works is
to create smart contracts
on a platform like Ethereum. Ethereum has, has
become really dominated, dominant for this kind
of thing where you have, you know, you,
you basically have three things, some code, the code of the
smart contract, and you have a pot of
gold supervised by this code, you know, this code is the law
for, for this coin. So there's a, there's
a pot of gold, a balance in, in coin A or cryptocurrency
A and a balance in coin B. Right.
And the code allows anybody who wants to come make a request,
say, and the requests are either, okay, I
want to exchange some coin A to coin B, or I want to
exchange some coin B for coin A, right?
And when everybody, anybody makes such a request, well,
this is the code basically just running on
the blockchain, the code decides, okay, this is the
current exchange rate. If you want that much
A, this is the amount of, amount of B you have to
provide at that current exchange rate. You know,
if it's satisfied, it goes, okay, thank you. Here's
your, here's your B, thank you for the
A, it updates the state. And, and there's a new exchange rate
that's calculated in an interesting mathematical way. So,
you know, fascinating mathematics behind
this. The more, the more people demand B,
say, you know, if a lot of people say, here's some A,
give me some B, then the price, then
the exchange rate is going to shift so, so B's, you know,
so, so B is more expensive than A,
right? And if, if a lot of people trade the other ways,
you know, it's the exchange rate automatically shifts
the other way. So it kind of incentivizes,
you know, so there can be a lot
of these automated market makers all over the place and on different
blockchains. And there's kind of an interesting incentive
compatibility argument that, that this
incentivizes everybody to, you know, find, you know,
to kind of agree on a reasonable exchange rate,
because any, any one of these that's way
off the, you know, is basically providing an incentive
for somebody to profit by bringing back, bringing
it back to the, you know, to the, to the current
going exchange rate. So anyway, you know, the
fact that this actually works, and, you know, you can
do this kind of thing completely on the
blockchain with, with smart contracts is, you know, pretty
interesting and impressive, right? But yeah, there's a
lot of other interesting things you can do,
like auctions and the list goes on, things
that, you know, economists love, right, investors, but
I don't want to get too sidetracked by
this, but yeah.
Yeah, you would go elsewhere if, if the
Swiss francs are expensive here, you'll go elsewhere,
and maybe you'll sell the Swiss francs to
this platform and make a profit, right, by, by helping
to bring, bring this back to reason, right?
That's the idea, exactly. Yeah. So that, that's why this,
you know, within some assumptions, it actually works,
works pretty well. But yeah, so, so that's
cool. Anyway, but, you know, but, you know,
that's all interesting. It's not really the, you know,
the central topic of the course, but this
is where I want to get to decentralized
autonomous organizations
or DAOs, right? So this is, you know,
in blockchain lingo, the idea of like, you know, creating a whole
all digital, all decentralized equivalent of a traditional,
you know, kind of human organization,
a corporation, a nonprofit, for profit, nonprofit, whatever,
you know, some kind of organization.
But we want to do it all digitally,
all on the blockchain represented by, you know, have the
rules, the formation, the organizations, constitution,
the rules for operation
for the governance of the, of the organization.
Ideally, at least in principle, all in smart
contract code.
Basically, you know, the entire organization and all
the critical rules of it live on the
blockchain, right? So this is kind of the
geeky vision of, of DAOs. Take, take, you know, the
traditional organizational structures and, and make them, you
know, kind of entirely
blockchain based by using this kind of smart
contract. Now, first of all, why would you want to do this?
What's, what's the appeal here? Well, there's several,
as usual, that's complicated, but any, any guesses?
What gets blockchain, DAO geeks so excited about
this idea?
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So that's, that's one of the
ideas. So, so, um,
let's say, yeah, so automatic.
And let's see, we can even make that
stronger. Fair, transparent. I'm still going to put it in
quotes for important reasons.
Enforcement
of whatever rules are laid out in the,
you know, in the smart contract. Now, you know, what, so,
why transparent? Well, because at least in Bitcoin
tradition and in many blockchain tradition,
everything that's on the blockchain is public. Anybody
can look at it and it's immutable, you
know, as there's no disagreement about what the,
what, what, what the bits on the blockchain are.
Right. And if there's code, if part of
the, what's on the blockchain is this code,
everybody can look at the code and inspect
it and see what the rules are. Right. And see if they,
see if you like the rules or you
don't like the rules. And if you like the rules, you can become a
member, you can invest, what do you do,
whatever the rules allow you to do. Right. If you don't like
it, well, stay away. Right. You know, that's
the, that's the idea. And if you do like the rules and
you persist, participate, then the rules are fairly,
you know, automatically and fairly enforced,
because, well, you know, they come right out
of the code. They, you know, whatever happens is
exactly what the code says happens. Right. So,
you know, if you have, if you have correctly, you
know, if you like what the code says,
then well, you know, whatever the code says happens, that's,
that's, you know, how many of you have
heard the phrase code as law?
Wasn't this a, Larry Lessig?
I can, I'm, whoops, not sure of that,
but that's the name that comes to mind. Right. So this is,
you know, just the, you know, blockchain smart
contracts are just the ultimate embodiment of
the code as law principle. We are writing
the law in code, you know, at least the law of these
organizations. Right. So whatever the, whatever the code
says is what the law is for, for the
purposes of these organizations. Right. So yeah, super
promising and exciting idea.
Can you see anything that might possibly go
wrong?
Of course things can go wrong and have
gone massively wrong. Yeah.
Oh.
Yeah. Yeah. Bugs are a problem in all
kinds of ways. Yeah. Yeah.
So yeah, you know, once you, once you
put, you know, codified a smart contract in particular
code and put it on the blockchain and
a bunch of people have started investing, you know,
kind of putting their money into that particular
pot, you know, by investing in it or, or whatnot.
Right. Well, you know, and then somebody discovers
a bug, well, how do you change it?
Well, that's, that can be difficult. You know,
you can and, and it has become, you know, kind of
after some really bad experiences, it has become
standard practice to insert upgrade mechanisms
and things, but those, those add complexity and
things can go wrong with them too. But yeah, go ahead.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Uh huh.
Exactly. Who gets, if there's an upgrade mechanism,
who gets the right to use that backdoor,
upgrade backdoor and will it be used correctly?
Will it be used in everybody's interest or in your
own private selfish interest to steal all the
money, for example? Right. Yeah. So, yeah. Yeah. So,
so upgrades,
and fixes of bugs are a very difficult
problem. Right. Not unsolvable,
but, you know, a very difficult problem. Yeah.
Sorry. What?
Oh, yeah. This is centralization. Sir, sir. In
practice, very often, like, you know, one,
close knit development team has the key, has
the upgrade keys, you know, and yeah, if anybody can
upgrade it, it's only them and they decide
how it's going to be upgraded. So, um, yeah. So often,
often the upgrade process can, you know, make
it reintroduce centralization. Now, to be fair,
this is only one of the many ways
that blockchain cryptocurrency Dow projects can
accidentally or intentionally become very centralized. Actually, you
know, there's a lot of
these cryptocurrency thing, you know, that, that, uh,
that claim to be highly decentralized. But if
you look at it from, you know, relevant
metrics, you know, like the number of, the number of actual
independent parties that actually hold most of the
power in practice, whether for upgrading or mining
or, you know, on various dimensions, often that's
super small, like two or three party, you know,
big parties hold basically all the power and,
you know, and they turn out to be not very
decentralized at all. Right. So, so, you know,
you're right. This is one reason that, you know,
these can be very centralized, but it's one
of the many reasons of that guy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
But then, you know, there can, of course,
uh, you know, of course, bugs can be security bugs,
right? And security bugs can sometimes, sometimes be
exploited, right?
Exploitable bugs. And this is what most famously
happened with a particular Dow, which was
very, which was very prominently just called the
Dow.
Right. So there's an important difference between Dow's
and the Dow, right? So who's heard of the
Dow before? This was a famous incident where
fairly early in the, as Ethereum was, was getting
established where, um, somebody proposed a particular Dow
kind of smart contract that
it was basically trying to be a way
to invest money, uh, into supporting projects. So, you know,
kind of a meta development, you know, project,
crowdfunding kind of smart contract. So, and
so many people got so super excited about
this that everybody was investing their Ethereum into
the Dow, right? And it, it ballooned, you
know, the amount of money in the pot supervised this one,
but by this one smart contract ballooned into,
into some significant, you know,
fraction of the entire total value of the
Ethereum blockchain at that time of the Ethereum currency.
And then some mysterious anonymous hacker discovered a
nice little recursion bug
in the code and started actually exploiting it
before there was any opportunity to fix or upgrade
or anything like that, right? And this bug
basically allowed them to exfiltrate the coin from, from
the Dow to their own private mirror of
the Dow, you know, their own version of it, where, from
which they would eventually, there was kind of,
it couldn't be immediately exploited. There was kind
of a 30 day lockout, that kind of
a 30 day cool down thing built in that apparently they didn't
manage to work around. So, but they, you
know, very quickly started to exfiltrate a lot of,
large fraction of the coin from the main
Dow to their private Dow, which 30 days later they would
have been able to basically just take it
all out and run away with it. But because this, you know,
this project had become so, had accumulated, already
accumulated such a large percentage
of the total value of Ethereum, there were
a lot of concerns among the whole community as well as
the, you know, leader and leading developers of
Ethereum, that, you know, if this project tanked
because of this one bug, then all of
Ethereum might tank with it, right? You know, that was a
a real concern. And so there was this
enormous debate between the, partly philosophical, between
the, the code is lobby, you know, there
was the side that said, well, the code is the code, the code
is law, this, you know, attacker was exploiting
a bug that was there, is there in the code, anybody
could have seen the code, anybody else could
have found the code and decided maybe this isn't such a
great investment. Right? But of course, well, and
then there were all the other people who had
invested and didn't really want to lose all
their money. Right? And so this is where the, you know,
the, the geeky, you know, purist code is
law, you know, philosophy came head to head in this giant
battle with the, with the camps that said,
hey, pragmatically, we don't want to lose our money.
And, you know, and we also don't want
all of Ethereum, the whole Ethereum project to tank,
right? And so, so this, you know, so
the, the majority, the main Ethereum
developers in the Ethereum community actually decided to
fix this, they, they tweaked the,
the basic rules of Ethereum basically just, just
to claw back that money and cancel this whole
project, cancel the Dow and give every refund
to everybody, their money, essentially. So, so the,
you know, the majority basically rolled out a
fix in this was Ethereum, they didn't have a way to
fix the contract, they had to change a
hacky theory to do this, right? And so this was basically
the first, you know, all blockchain example of
a too big, what we call a too big to fail
operation. So you've heard this term, you usually
we describe, use it to describe
companies like in Switzerland, I would imagine like,
SBB is probably too big to fail or Swiss,
Swiss, Swiss post is totally too big to
fail, right? You know, if Swiss post got into serious
trouble, well, somebody would bail it out, right?
At some level, because well, you know, if it failed,
then actually maybe a better example would be,
would be, I'm sorry,
the bank that actually did come close to
failing, right?
Pretty sweet, thank you, thank you. Yeah. So
it was indeed deemed by, you know, the highest levels
as too big to fail, to let fail,
you know, could have tanked the whole Swiss economy,
the whole Swiss banking system. So let's make
this, you know, special deal where, where, where it
gets, sorry? It did fail, yeah, you're, it
was in the process, it was absolutely in the process
of failing, yeah. And, you know, it created
this emergency situation that, okay, we can't let it
completely fail because that's going to be bad
for not just crazy, Swiss and their customers,
it's going to be bad for all of
Switzerland. So, you know, got to fix it somehow, right? And so,
so that's what they, that's what they did.
And that's what the, you know, kind of majority
stakeholders of Ethereum did here, you know, the
Dow was too big to fail, right? So, okay,
they didn't do it. On the other hand,
there was always, there was this vocal minority,
the purists who said, no, code is law,
that hacker was doing nothing wrong by exploiting
something that was in the transparently in the
code, right? We do not accept this Ethereum fix,
right? Say they actually forked their own version
of Ethereum. Anybody heard of Ethereum Classic?
Yeah.
Or ETC, right? So, that is a flavor,
alternate flavor of Ethereum that was forked off the main one,
precisely in opposition, kind of in philosophical opposition
to, to this too big to fail logic,
right? So, yeah, as far as I know,
it's still around, right? Around and kicking, I'm not sure
what its status or how many people are
supporting or using it, but, you know, and often, you know,
cryptocurrencies often, often do have forks in many
times along these kind of philosophical
differences that, you know, each group is not
willing to, you know, kind of to go with the
other's opinion, you know, so we're going to
fork off our own cryptocurrency. So anyway,
so this is just a little, little taste
of some of the interesting, you know, things that have
happened so far in this Tao space. There's
a whole lot more I'd love to talk about, you know, but
for lack of time, and hopefully we can
come back to some of the relevant parts of this later, but,
you know, so fascinating attempts to bring, you
know, organization and democracy in some fashion
onto blockchains with interesting effects. So, yeah, so
thank you. I'll see you next week.
