These subtitles have been generated automatically
Okay. Hi everyone. Again, for this week, I'm replacing Brian. And today we will be talking
about something different that we have been seeing
from the last two weeks, which was
more down the lines of influence and online
reputation. But today we'll be talking about
election methods. And specifically, we'll talk about vote
counting schemes. Right. So
yes, let's get started. So if we think
about elections in a country, by the way, am I audible
to the back? It's good. Okay. Yes. So
if you think about elections in a country, what
are the properties that you would like to
have? So what properties would you desire when you
are holding an election in a country? Yeah.
Yeah, that's a good start. Fairness. That is, for each voter,
you should consider the vote equally. That's a
very good start. What if your system does not
have fairness? Do you think fairness is important?
What if you do not have fairness in a voting
scheme? Yeah. Exactly. But yeah, there's another point
which I can bring probably later during the
lecture and we can talk about it. But
in general, if you look around everyone, then people do not
really have the worldview or the entire perspective
of the people they're voting for. Right. I mean,
not everyone knows as well as let's say
someone who has been studying political science for a long
duration. So there still remains a question if
what is the definition of fairness in a voting
scheme? But let's not talk about it for
to start with fairness is about giving equal voting rights
that everyone should have the same weightage of
voting. What else would you like? Yeah, that's a
very good one again. So in the voting
schemes that you see generally you have, you either put a
paper in the simplest one or you press
a button corresponding to the names. And so yeah, it
should be as easy as possible. Someone need
not do a PhD or masters to vote for someone. So that's
how simple it should be. Right. To add
to simplicity, I would also say accessibility. And this
is for everyone and even people with challenges
with mobility issues, they should be also able to
vote for people. Right. So these are the
properties that we want. What more would you like? Yes.
Let's say access to information.
Yeah, this is an interesting point because not
many countries do it.
As you would see during their rallies, generally
it's the politicians making
fake promises and not everyone knows about it.
And people do not really get the right
set of information.
And from the lectures that you saw in
influence, you would also observe that
the things that show up on Twitter or
I don't know Facebook,
if you consider the case of Cambridge Analytica,
these are the things which sway people's minds
a lot.
So yes, information and the right set of
information, not the emotions,
but the facts that should be put out
there.
Honestly, this is a huge challenge given the
current state of the world.
But yeah, I should rather put the right
information.
What more would you want while you're calculating
the votes or
when you're evaluating the results of a voting
scheme?
Yes?
Why am I voting for the person?
Yeah, very nice.
Notable counting, that is if I go in
a cast of vote and if I go back again and
cast a vote, then it should not be
counted.
Okay, but if the government is the one
which is making the decision to veto, I don't know
if you saw last year during the elections
in Romania, it was quite rigged and there
were some issues and because of this, the
entire elections were scraped and like they
had to keep the old government in straight
for a while. I mean, the bigger question comes in,
who should be able to veto and who
should not be able to veto, right? I mean, I do not disagree
with the point, but how I would put
it rather is someone should not be able to, I don't know,
cheat with the vote counting mechanism or just
change it with their vote. I do agree with that,
but if you look at the current poll,
the election outcomes can be very, very crazy. So
I would say vetoing is or changing the
decision is important as well, because if you look at Romania's
last year selections, you would also appreciate this
fact too. So just double check maybe.
But yeah, I would like to bring in
another point is confidentiality.
So yeah, it's just so that you have
the freedom to vote for anyone, no one should be able to
figure out who you voted for. And so
that you don't feel the pressure to go about voting for
someone else. Along the lines of your points
that you put, I think I would say
the output should represent people's will, I guess
that's what you were referring to kind of,
right? So yeah, exactly the vote counting scheme
should not just let's say pick a random member
from the ballot and just choose them. So
that's important as well. And a very simple but important
point is the voting system should be practical
and it should not be very expensive logistically.
Let's say I mean, it should not require
people to show up 100 times in a year to put a vote.
It should be pretty simple to use not
only in terms of when you vote once but also the overall
process. So this is what you want in
the vote in an entire election or an entire voting system.
But let's talk about voting, vote counting schemes,
right? Because if you have looked at the reading,
this is the main focus of this week.
So with vote counting schemes, what we have is
so consider that you have ensured correct registration
of people and let's assume that
people are registered well and it's one registration
per person somehow and it works out fine. So let's
just assume that there is correct registration. But
what will be the issue if it's not there?
If the registration process itself is rigged, will
there be an issue?
Exactly. So this needs to be there with
you. And so let's assume this is there. Then what are the
two factors or what are the factors that
you would care about for evaluating the outcome?
So how would you start? Let's say now
you have registered people. What's the first thing that
you need to care about for setting up
your election? Let me put this easily. So first what you need
is ballots. I mean, that's how people will
cast their votes. So the first question that you would
have is what should the ballots look like?
Should it be a single person whose name you have to write
down or should it be list of names
you have to tick or should it be that you need to rank people
in the ballot? What should it look like?
And what will be the next thing? The next thing is
right there on the screen. Anyone can mention.
So once you have the votes cast on the ballots,
what would you do next? So let's say
people have cast their votes. What would you do next?
Yeah, exactly. So yes.
How do you count votes?
And as you can see, these two things
are dependent.
Right? You cannot create, let's say some ballot
of some kind, but you want to count in some way,
but your ballots need to give you the
right set of information so that you can count them.
So if you would have taken a look
at the reading, what's the simplest form of taking the votes from
people and then counting them? What's the simplest
way of doing elections?
Like how do you choose a winner in
the easiest way?
Yeah.
Exactly.
And how would you cast the votes from
people then? Like what would you take as input from people?
Like if I walk into an election booth
as a voter, what information would you want from me?
Because let's say there are tens of people
that I can vote for, then as a voter,
what information should I provide?
Okay. Yes.
Exactly. My first choice, like who do I
rank at the top? That makes sense. You have a bunch of
people who people can choose or the citizens
can choose. And from citizens, what you want is
the name of their top choice. Right? So
what you would want is
the top choice. The nice thing about or
since this design is very simple,
this works well with two candidates with no
ties, of course. So if you have two candidates,
then it's pretty simple because it's easy to
see that one person has the majority of the votes.
So it's pretty simple to decide who people
prefer more. Well, let's say when you have
more than two candidates, right? And let's say
you have candidate A who has 33% of the votes,
candidate B who has 33% of the votes,
and candidate C who has 34% of the votes.
Right? According to this rule, if you see,
then this person is going to
be the winner. Right? But does this really
make sense to choose C as the winner just because
of 1% of the vote? For instance, just
consider A and B turn to be from left wing and C turns
to be from the right wing. And if
you look at this voting scheme, then if only one of A or
B had stood for elections, they would have
gotten about 60% of the votes. But since
they went for different parties or different bodies,
their votes were distributed and in turn
C got the votes and C won the
election. So as you can see, the vote counting scheme does not really
incorporate the will of the people, if that
makes sense. So although majority rule or welcome,
its exact name is plurality rule, it's very
simple and you can count the votes pretty easily.
It's not really effective, if that makes sense.
Right? So just continuing here with
plurality rules, it becomes even worse when you
have to choose
multiple winners. And as you can see in
this case, who would you choose? Like even if you
take plurality, then who would you choose as
a second? So you would have to redo the election
to choose between A and B. So yeah,
as you can see, although plurality is pretty simple to use,
it's not really effective to get enough information
from people.
So given that, the main question that comes
in now is
what are the properties
that you want from vote counting?
So yeah, let's say you have the votes
from people. So what are the properties that you would want
from the vote counting scheme? I can start.
Probably the dumbest property and the simplest
property is it should always decide or should
give an output.
There should be no case that it does
not give an output unless everyone has the same number of votes.
So this property needs to be that. What
other properties would you like from your vote counting?
Yes?
So you're talking about taking pairwise people and
then who want the most number of
head-to-head comparisons? They should be chosen.
Okay, but is it something that or something
else?
Okay. Yeah, I mean, you are talking about
one of the points for sure. If you have taken a look at
the reading, it's called like Condorset winner. And
in this case, what you do is
you take
two pairs and the candidate
who wins all pairwise comparison is the winner.
Right? So the idea of Condorset is that
the winner should be someone who should have
more preferences as compared to every other candidate
in there. So why do you think this is
good or why do what are the perks
and what are the benefits of using Condorset
way of counting things and like what are
the benefits over plurality that we just talked about
and what could be the issue?
Why do you say that?
But that's, I mean, that's really on the
vote counting scheme, right? I mean, after people vote,
you can run, let's say a Python script.
Exactly. So that's the most important point.
Cycles. So the issue could be that you
can arrive at cases where A beats B and then B beats
C and then you could have all have
then B, C beats A. So you could have such cases with Condorset
and in these cases, you can never have
a deterministic winner in there, right?
And what other issues could be there? Like
if you think down the lines of
something like this example out here, right, what
kind of winner would a Condorset
setting choose? Let's say if there are two
extremes that we have talked about when you go
for elections, then you have the left extreme,
there's a right extreme and there is a center,
right? In general, that's that's how it is.
So which kind of candidate would Condorset
benefit? Like if we consider Condorset based counting,
then which kind of candidate would
Condorset benefit? If you can think of. Not
in this, if you I'm just talking about like my bad.
So I'll come back to you. So you
have left, you have the center
and you have the right, right? So which
of these candidates would Condorset benefit? Yes?
Yeah. Should I repeat again? So I'm saying
like, so let's say there is an extreme candidate,
like there are two extremes like which are
at the left and which are at the right, right?
And there is someone in the center and
generally the way it works in a country is let's say
you have a large population in here, you
have a large population in here, supporting the left,
supporting the right. And let's say if there
is a small population supporting the center.
So who do you think is Condorset going
to? Yeah. Yeah, exactly. And what would the reason be?
Exactly. Exactly.
So I'm not saying it's just actually first
of all what he said was is a perfect answer,
is that the people on the left, they
are going to, what they're going to do is
they're going to say, okay, left is amazing.
The center is, it's okay, we don't really care.
But on the other hand, the right is
not, we do not want the right. On the other hand,
what the right would want is not the
left. The center is okay. And we want the right to be there.
On the other hand, what the center is
going to do is, yeah, the center is amazing because, yeah,
it's neither of the extremes. And for the
left or right, it could be something random or the way
they see it. So what this means is
what Condorset gives the benefit is that the extremes do not
see the center as bad as they would
see the other extreme. So when you compare the pair-wise
comparison, like when you take that, then the
center will be second for the left as well as
for the right. So when you take the
head to head counting, the center would not be last in many
cases, if that makes sense, right? Because the
center is going to be the second for the rest of
them, and is going to be the top
for the center supporting people. So this is not something wrong,
per se, but this is a benefit that
Condorset counting gives, Condorset based system gives
two voters, like the people who support the
center. And if we take
Condorset winner, then most likely the center is
going to win. So that's kind of that, right?
So that's there. And so there are the
two issues. And of course, yeah, we talked about
the bad things or things that could not
be nice, but what is the benefit over plurality voting?
Like what is nice with Condorset with respect
to plurality? Like when you just take the majority
or the maximum number of votes, and if
you compare it with Condorset in here, then which is better?
Like you mentioned, like if we take pair-wise,
it could be a better choice. Why do you think so?
Okay. Okay.
Yeah. The most important thing, I mean, that
you can think of is you are taking in more information
from people as well. Like you're not only
taking the top choice, but you're also taking in the
second choice, the third choice, right? So what
this gives is if your first choice is not chosen,
because of some reason, then your second choice
could also help us give some information.
And your second choice can also lead to
the change in outcome, right? Because as a voter,
if my first choice is not chosen as
for whatever position, then at least I would like to see my
second choice. Let's say if many people voted
for my second choice, it's a top choice,
then my second choice could be chosen. So
what this kind of counting does is that it takes in
more information for the vote counting, and therefore
your vote counting is kind of more accurate
if I were to say, right? So this
is the benefit, let's say, of Condorset. And yeah,
what more coming back to the question that
we had took?
Yeah, what more properties would you like? So
we saw that we first wanted took, we should
always decide.
Condorset winner, what more features would you would
you want from your vote counting schemes?
There's one point that you mentioned when we're
talking about election methods.
We did discuss about that, if you recall.
And which you kind of covered with the
Condorset as well.
Okay, we should try to
elect the will of majority, right? I mean,
that's what we want to cover in elections like.
What does the majority want? And of course,
the problem that pops up is
what of no majority. So how do you
handle this case? Right?
So this is what you want, your vote
counting scheme should always take in what the people want.
And as much as that information you can
use for the outcome, the better it is for you.
So this is what you want. Yes, what
other things would you want from your vote counting schemes?
Should it be stochastic? Should the vote counting
scheme be stochastic?
That is, you given the same set of
votes, should the outcome be something which you don't know,
that you what your algorithm is going to
output or should it be something
which should be the same all the time?
That's a you count the votes once, right?
And you have a vote counting algorithm.
And your vote counting algorithm takes the number
of votes or whatever the ballots were.
Then what should it be? Should the output
be something random or should it be something
constant? Like should be the same output every
time you run the algorithm?
Exactly. Yeah, it should be deterministic, right? That's
one of the algorithms. So I mean,
one way of running a election is you
count all the votes, but you do not really care. But you
take the names of the people and you
just find a random member to win the election. I mean,
it is an election because you chose someone
to win. But if it's random, then that's not what
accounts for the will of the people, right?
So when you are counting votes, it should be
deterministic every time you run the algorithm or
the method for vote counting. If that makes sense.
Right. What more did we talk about in
this slide? Yes, we talked about fairness for voters.
But what about for candidates? What more would
you expect from your vote counting scheme?
Okay, so you're talking about like the opportunities
that the candidates get before the elections
as well.
But won't that be kind of included in
this point?
I'm not sure.
I mean, I think the rallies which are
there, I don't know in the election in states and
other debates which are held, they are meant
to give equal opportunities, right?
So I would probably put it here.
But my main question is like, if it's
fair for like, if the voting scheme needs to be
fair for the voters, don't you think it
should be fair for the candidates as well?
Like your voting algorithm should be fairness, that
is, should not prefer
the candidate, right?
I mean, when you're counting the votes, your
voting algorithm should not be, let's say,
dependent on who you are counting for.
It should be oblivious to the fact that
whoever is a candidate, it doesn't matter.
It would count the votes correctly.
So it should not be preferential if that
makes sense.
But let's say it does not depend on,
it might maybe, it does not depend on the order in
which you're counting votes or something.
So let's say if you start with person
A first, then person A happens to win.
That algorithm is not fair, right?
I mean, because you started with A and
that's why A happens to win.
So your voting algorithm, the vote counting algorithm
should be fair.
It should not give some preference to candidate
so that whatever people cast the vote, that
should be represented in the outcome if that
makes sense.
So that's what you would want.
And again, like the same points as it
should be simplicity.
We want the algorithm to be simple so
that we can track back and see what could be the
the votes be.
It should not be very complicated so that
we do not understand how the votes are being counted.
And then we cannot decide, okay, that's the
kind of vote that we had.
And we want to understandability.
And finally, that in terms of plurality voting,
right?
There was one issue that we missed.
So let's say, so as you can see,
this point here, plurality voting works really well for two candidates.
So if you will see in the US
elections or I think in any general country, then you would see that there are top two candidates and the other ones happen to be the minor candidates and they do not really get many votes.
So as a voter, when you know that
these two people are going to be the main candidates in the election, how would you go about voting?
Yes?
You would vote, sir.
Exactly.
That's the main thing.
So is that a property that you would
like to have or you would not want?
Exactly.
So what you would want to avoid probably
is strategic voting, right?
Because then what you're doing is you are
telling people to avoid their own choice so that they do not really waste their vote.
Right?
But the funny part is the US people
who set up the voting system in the States and which is supposedly one of the first democracies of this scale,
they're stuck with plurality voting, which is strategic
and which could be troublesome.
What could be the reason?
Why do you think they wanted strategic voting
to stay?
Why do you think they wanted plurality to
stay?
Why would you want people to stay with
plurality voting?
Although you see that it can be susceptible
to strategic voting.
The main reason why they stuck with this
voting mechanism was they did not want some extremists to win the elections or something.
Let's say if there are some extremists and
these extremists managed to gather a bunch of vote, let's say, and you do not happen to use plurality voting, right?
Then these extremists might form the majority as
well at that point, if that makes sense. On the other hand, when you're using something like a majority rule or the plurality voting, then people think about, okay, maybe we should only consider our top two candidates and that's what we would go for.
So they are kind of using a reverse
psychology in this process, if you may, so that people go with the potentially right sort of candidates. That's why you would see in most of the elections that have been there in the states.
India, since I know of India, you would
see that there are top two candidates which are there and although they claim to be not extremists, that's what they say.
That's what they want, like, yes.
Yes.
So, it's in India the way it works
is there are the two biggest parties which exist and they go for the elections and
by the scale of it and by the
positions that they hold, you as voters, you know that, okay, these are going to be the top two candidates and the visibility as well, if I had to put it that way.
And if I'm not wrong, the way it
works is in the states, you would see the top two candidates emerging in the states as well from Democrats and the Republicans, and then there are the minority parties.
But it's just probably because of the visibility
of them. So you know these two are going to be the main candidates and that's why they have, yeah, the battle, I would say, for the voting.
And we would come to another type of
voting mechanism where it relies on voting to choose the two main candidates as well. But yeah, that's, that's probably another good question.
I would say it's probably because of visibility
and you know, okay, these are the main people who are going to be out there. So yeah, that's that's mostly about it.
So, yes. So, yeah, based on these requirements,
we will take a look into different vote counting methods that we will talk about probably after the break, and you guys can take a 15 minute break and then we can have a chat at around 415 or 414.
Okay. So yeah, welcome back.
So, before the break we saw what are
the properties that we would like in in our vote counting schemes.
So let's now take a look at different
vote counting schemes that you that you might have seen in the readings. Right.
So yeah, until now the ones that we
have discussed is is the majority rule.
And yeah, it works only for two candidates
pretty well.
So, yeah, this one was plurality.
And we saw that it's, it could be
troublesome when people start to strategize and they do not vote for the person whom they want. So, this one fails to avoid strategic voting.
Right. So yes, what are the other schemes
that you might have seen in the readings.
Yes.
Sorry.
Yeah.
And do you recall its name?
What it's called.
Okay, yeah, makes sense. Yes.
It's, it's called.
I don't know if voting, and how does
this work? Can you repeat it in.
More.
Yeah, perfect. That's what Erunov is. So again,
I'm not aware exactly about the friend system.
What if the first round itself you have
a majority, then do you still run the election?
Yeah, it's done right. Yeah, okay. Yeah, makes
sense. Yeah, that's exactly what Erunov voting is.
And yeah, you run the election once. And
if one party has more than majority, then you declare
that party as the winner. And if not,
then you take the top two parties, and then you
read in the elections. So what are the
nice things and what are the issues with such a scheme?
The nice thing is you are transforming the
problem
into majority voting, which is perfect, right?
I mean, if you have the top two
candidates
and you have voting between them, then you
are transforming this into a problem which
especially in the first phase, people can vote
for party strategically and they may not show their will as they would want.
And as a voter, would you like such
a scheme? Like in terms of cost, let's say, in terms of cost or do you think it's a scheme that is easy for you to use or is it?
Okay. And in terms of logistics, let's say
for the people who set up these voting, do you think it's cheap?
Yeah.
Yeah. Exactly.
Two rounds, it makes things expensive. And the
bigger issue is, let's say if you do the first round, then people show up to vote for people.
And they, in the first round, people would
have candidates who they would prefer, right? But in the second round, when they, when they go about voting, then they might not have candidates who they would like to vote.
So the voter turnout would also be affected
with such a method. So what this leads to is voter turnout might reduce in the later.
Right. Okay.
Yeah. So what other schemes did you see?
Yeah, in the reading, if you took a
look.
Yes.
Okay, I see what you mean. Okay. Yes.
So this comes down the lines of
Conductor Twinners. Yeah, again. So here what you're
talking about is oops, yeah, the top is the
one who is on the top is given
K minus one points, right? The second. So in this case, you are
ranking the candidates first of all. And then
the second candidate is given K minus two points. And
the last person is given zero points from
the ballot. And then what you do is from each voter, as
it was mentioned, you sum up the points,
right? And then you see how many points does each candidate
receive. And yeah, the points and the person
with max points wins the election.
Right. So yeah, this is one of the
ways of dealing with rankings, right? Yeah, so there was a second
reading, there were two readings, I don't know,
the title itself told what voting scheme it is,
the vote counting scheme it is, if you
took a look. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, so it's called the single
transferable vote. And yeah, as you mentioned, you
consider the candidate who is at the bottom and you
remove. So let's talk about the simplest scheme
in the single transferable vote. So when you have only one
winner, then you call it either alternative voting
or instant runoff voting. So what you do with instant runoff is
you take the first choices of people. So
again, the input is the ranks of candidates. And you, the way the algorithm works is
you take the first rank of all. And
if you find that there is a majority, then we declare the person as a winner. But if you do not
have a majority, then you remove the last
candidate, that is the person who had the least number of first position votes, you just
remove that and you assume you start counting
as if this person was never in the election. So now what happens is the votes are now distributed to others like the last person's votes.
And now you see if there is a
majority. And yeah, if the answer is no, then you keep repeating you keep repeating the last candidate, and you keep seeing if there is a majority.
So the votes get redistributed. And you see
if this thing works, right? So this is the simpler case for single transferable vote. But when you have multiple winners, it gets quite complex as well.
And you would have to weigh the number
of votes based on the surplus that a candidate has, and you would have to redistribute in a way that redistribute based on the number of winners.
So you need to take into account such
things and especially you need to wait the surplus and you need to be careful. So yeah, not getting into the nitty gritty details of this one, but you can take a look at the reading for how the scheme works with multi winners.
Right.
Yes. So in terms of voting schemes, what
other schemes did you see. So for ballots you saw that one type of ballot is taking the top choice.
So another type of ballot is taking the
ranks of candidates, which you saw. There was another type of voting scheme, if you recall, which took another kind of ballot.
Nope.
Okay. Yeah, if you take a look at
the readings, it's called approval voting, if you see. And what you do is
you approve of candidates that you prefer. And
for candidates, you count the total number of approvals that each candidate receives.
Right. So if you see that if you're
giving approvals for everyone, then it doesn't really make a difference.
But yeah, if you disprove off someone that
you do not like, then that counts the difference. So this is what approval voting is about. So it's a bit different from ranking, because the people who you approve of get the same weight of the votes.
On the other hand, when you're ranking people,
then people, even the candidates that you prefer, they have a logical ordering in there. Right.
So that's that.
And in terms of what you saw with
the voting, right.
If you would see, there was a counterpart,
you don't know if you call which is called Coombs voting and with runoff voting. The thing was you, you always considered, or I should say rather single transferable vote.
Yeah, you in case of single transferable vote,
you always removed the last candidate, the last candidate, but with Coombs voting you
Yeah, you start eliminating the one with the
most last places instead. So you are not considering the top fours, you're instead considering the ones with the most last places.
But this has some issues with respect to
with who can be removed if you try to think if you where could this not work with respect to runoff runoff voting like you start removing the last places that this person got.
So, do you think this is this a
good idea or is this a bad idea to use.
But the thing with such a case is
even in case of Coombs voting, let's say if someone who might have even a majority, they can be disliked by
a lot of people and they might be
kicked out sooner than they should have been if you see that way.
So that's the trade off that you come
with always like a person might have a lot of last places positions but they might be liked by a lot of people as well given how the distribution of population is.
So it might lead to the case where
the majority is not really chosen at the end of the day. So, so yeah, that's, that's always the trade off that you that you need to deal with.
And yeah, in case of the in case
of condors at winners, if you see, if you take a look at the reading, you can see that there are different ways of dealing with with cycles in case of condors at winners.
And yeah, they are just different variations of
each other. You can see something like ranking the pairs one by one, and you not only rank the people, you also see the difference between, or if some pair had a large margin of victory or a small margin of victory.
And if there was a large margin of
victory, you give that the preference.
So those are the logics that you used
to deal with cycles instead so you do not go about you not only consider the ranks of the individual candidates but also the pairs.
So, yeah, there are different variations that you
can see for for condors at winners cycles. So, the way you deal with cycles. And yes.
So, yeah, that's, that's mostly there and
Yeah, I think we can finish the lecture
today if you do not have many questions and that's that's the main thing. And yeah, think down the lines of which voting scheme would give preference to what kind of candidates like extremists, or would you give a preference to center
extremists.
And then try to see how things would,
how things would work with different population distribution, like, will it support the mind, will it represent the minorities well, will it represent the majority well.
So, yeah, try to think of those trade
offs because those are down the lines where the question would come in. And the readings also do a good job of giving different perspectives so yeah that's that's mostly about it.
Unless you have questions.
That's about it.
So yeah.
