These subtitles have been generated automatically
Hey, so today I want to switch back to the more, say, the more focus on democracy track
and look at, well, for the next couple
of weeks, we're going to look at some innovations,
attempts to rethink democracy, what democracy and voting
might mean in different ways.
And I'm personally a strong believer that democracy
is not static. It's, you know, it evolves and it
has to evolve gradually. The question is, well,
how should it evolve? And how should it co-evolve
with technology? There's a lot of potential answers
to that.
So this week, and with the readings I
assigned, we're looking at a particular
idea of how that works. So who has
heard of liquid or delicative democracy before?
Anyone?
Not yet? Okay. So first introduction.
So not too surprising because it's still, you
know, even though it's known in some,
you know, technology and activists and political science
circles, it's still a fairly niche,
you know, small thing that's not very prevalent
or very well accepted yet. It's still, let's say,
experimental. But it definitely has some precedent. So
where does this come from, though?
Let's first rewind. What is it? It's kind
of a, it's an attempt to,
at a, let's say, a balance or a,
or maybe even a best of.
The the existing world's of representative
versus direct democracy.
So what is the traditional, the main characterization
of representative democracy?
Or let's just say the, so you're all
familiar with the terms representative democracy and direct democracy, right?
So how would you characterize the difference between
representative democracy and direct democracy, at least in the ideals?
Good, good.
So the ideal of direct democracy is basically
all of the voting population themselves.
People discuss and decide and vote directly on
issues.
Right?
So that's really the key word.
Is it we're trying to decide collectively, you
know, this policy decision or, you know,
whether to do take a certain action or
not take a certain action, right?
Whereas representative democracy here, let me just be
a little bit more precise about
this.
We're talking voters, right?
So voters elect representatives
who do that.
Who discuss, decide and vote on issues.
Right?
So as a classic representative democracy, yeah, voting
is critical, but the only vote
you normally make directly as a voter is
to elect representatives and it's their job
to look into the actual issues and decide
on them and set the law and stuff like that.
So less time and attention demands on voters,
right?
It's kind of the quicker, easier way to
democracy, right? You know, you don't have to get that deep
into all of these complicated issues. That's somebody
else's job, right? It's your representative's
job. And another aspect of this argument is
specialization, right? Getting into all those
details is what's, that's what politicians are for,
right? And at the upper levels, typically,
they're full time, right? They're spending their whole
lives, hopefully, trying to figure out these
tough issues and making, you know, make the,
make the decisions so you don't have to spend all your
time, you know, wrestling with these, these tough
issues and discussing and deliberating and deciding
them, right? So, yeah, so sounds convenient for
everyone. So why do people complain about
representative democracy and, you know, right? Yeah.
Mm-hmm. So, exactly. So some of the downsides
are
representative democracy. One is, is kind of, in
a sense, less, less accountability,
more loosely attached to the voter. Okay, I
got my four year mandate. I've got power. I'm going to
do what I want now. Now, of course,
it's not quite that bad because many of those represents want to
be reelected after their two year, four year,
six year, whatever mandate. And, you know, they'll be
trying to, you know, do what, you know,
things that'll get them reelected or not do things that
won't get them reelected, right? So, you know,
so there arguably still is accountability, but,
you know, within a wide latitude and, you
know, you might,
so, yeah, but, you know, it's clearly less
weakened accountability, weakened mandate.
So, you know, and the flip side of
that was direct democracy. Yeah, sorry. Go ahead.
unique to US politics, I'm not sure how
unique,
but I think somewhat because, yeah,
the US especially puts an enormous amount of
attention,
culturally puts an enormous amount of attention,
like on the very top office, the president,
and kind of everybody kind of tends to
lose track of,
the lower level offices who often,
but then there's a lot of,
yeah, indirect effects between those levels,
such as this.
Yeah, so, and it's ironic that the level,
the election level that gets the most attention
is the one where each voter's vote
inherently kind of has the least impact on,
where your vote is the most diluted, right?
But yeah, that's an interesting,
partly election psychology thing,
maybe partly cultural thing, I'm not sure.
How many of you from other countries,
like to what extent is this an issue,
does this happen in other countries much as
well,
or not so much?
I think that, like, the most distant,
do the more distant, you know,
elections for the more distant,
higher level offices tend to get the lion's
share
of the media attention,
even though the elections for the closer offices
are actually closer to you,
and you have a better chance to actually
influence them,
or is it the reverse in some cases?
But one thing, you know, I'm not,
one thing I like about Switzerland is,
traditionally, there's a fairly strong,
there's a fairly strong culture of decentralizing,
keeping the power decentralized.
So the lower levels actually do have a
lot of power
that in the US, for example, tends to
get concentrated
in the upper levels, right?
So I would, you know, I'm not an
expert on this,
but I'm guessing part of the reason
for this particular effect in the US is
because, yeah,
so much power has gone up to the
highest levels,
and, you know, a lot of people kind
of correctly judge
that, well, that's where the important things
are happening anyway, and the, you know,
the local offices are, you know,
just doing what the upper offices allow them
to do,
which is not entirely true at all,
but, you know, there's some perception
and some reality there, and, you know,
in Switzerland, for example,
there's this contrasting culture that, you know,
power is normally, you know, should, you know,
really be reserved to the locals as much
as possible,
and only when it has to be pushed
up and centralized,
then centralize it in a very cautious, limited
way,
usually, right?
So, yeah, so that's, you know, kind of
another aspect
of there's, you know, across different countries,
there's different ways these principles apply,
and especially in terms of local versus, you
know,
different levels of government, but in any case,
yeah,
so, you know, we were talking about,
so, you know, one of the representative power
is more distant in general,
and less accountable to voters, right?
Whereas, you know, the flip side is obviously,
you know,
kind of the direct democracy approach.
Ideal is to keep power close to the
voters,
ideally with the voters themselves, right?
If the voters are directly making the decisions,
then, well, you know, you're keeping the power,
you're not shifting it to somebody else, right?
So, you know, from a certain type of
democratic idealism,
this is what we would like, right?
Not, you know, loosening the reins of the
people
and loosening the reins of the representatives,
and, you know, one might argue that what
we see in the US
with power kind of going up and centralizing
so much
is precisely what we don't want, you know,
because, well, you know, voters, you know,
kind of realize and they see that, well,
you know,
my vote isn't counting for anything, you know,
why am I even bothering to vote, right?
Yeah, so just keeping the power close,
but also, what are other arguments for direct
democracy,
besides just better accountability, keeping the power close?
Yeah?
Yeah, is that good or bad?
Yes, yes is exactly the right answer.
Yeah, yeah, so, yeah, on the one hand,
yeah,
it takes more time and attention,
you're making demands on the voters,
but maybe that is a worthwhile demand to
be placing
on voters, right?
It, it, it, I wouldn't say, you know,
maybe,
maybe not forces, but let's say it nudges,
or at least asks or expects
voters to study the issues, right?
So to learn what's, what's going on, to
participate
and to make their own decision, right?
And, and, you know, one of the long
time lessons
of democracy is that, you know,
regardless of the precise details of the system,
you know, when, when the voters are completely
uninvolved,
democracy tends to work not so well.
When voters are a lot more involved,
it tends to work better, right?
And yeah, you know, even if it,
even if direct democracy doesn't work perfectly,
if it successfully gets at least somewhat more
voters
directly involved and studying some of the issues
and looking at them, that, yeah, that, you
know,
that, that can be a benefit.
So there's a, there's a phrase that, you
know,
that, that sometimes gets used in political science
and activism circles.
There are some mechanisms that processes
that actually make quote unquote better voters,
make people better, better citizens.
And this is what, this is one of
them that often happens.
So it can nudge voters to become more
aware and,
effect you're referring to, one of the terms
for it is the bright,
shiny object effect.
So some particular hot button topic or issue
or even personality captures the public's
attention, captures the media's attention, the public's attention,
and everybody's just talking about that one thing,
even though it's probably not even the most
important thing to be discussed or decided on now.
And unfortunately, that happens all the time.
And unfortunately, it happens in direct democracies too.
For example, if you've looked at, well, California
tries to implement some fashion of direct democracy
at the state level,
sometimes that goes OK.
Sometimes it gets really, really bad into this
kind of bright, shiny object thing.
But I think you're right that, you know,
so I don't think either of these approaches
is immune to the bright, shiny object effect.
But yeah, when direct democracy is working well,
especially in places like here in Switzerland,
where before each major vote, the government kind
of sends out a bunch of information about each
of the questions with different viewpoints from different
perspectives and stuff,
trying to present a balance of perspectives and
stuff.
You know, it can help, you know, people,
encourage people to engage in all of the issues
and not just the one bright, shiny object.
But yeah, I think it's a good question.
What is the refliction process to other people?
So, it's, so, I think I kind of,
you know,
get what you're getting at.
So direct democracy is unfair in that it
expects a lot of,
you know, kind of thought and reflection,
decision-making from all of the voters,
and only some of the voters are really
capable
or have the time and attention to do
that.
Is that what you're getting at?
So like everybody has to do that,
or is expected to invest all this time
and effort,
including those that definitely don't have the time,
definitely don't have the interest,
definitely don't have the brainpower skill, whatever,
you know, whereas representative democracy
is trying to kind of really only assume
the least common denominator of participating.
And then, well, if you want to get
into the politics,
then you become a representative.
You know, if you have the time, interest,
brainpower,
all of that, then you become a politician,
that would become a representative, right?
Is that kind of what you're, okay, yeah,
yeah.
So, good point, yeah.
So, you know, so, you know,
whether that's fair or not, you know,
kind of the term fair is hard to
define,
and you know, that comes at many different
perspectives.
But this general objection that, yeah,
direct democracy may just demand too much
from the average voter.
And, you know, in that sense, you know,
representative democracy may be doing a better job.
Just let's just assume the absolute minimum,
you know, kind of be pessimistic about
the humans we're dealing with,
and then give a opportunity of advancement
for the true activists, namely becoming a representative,
right?
Yeah, good, you want to take some?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So, government gives you some pretty good,
pretty detailed information about all the things
on the agenda.
Yeah, so this is partly, you know, a
critical part,
you know, of course, is execution, you know,
and that execution is done pretty well here
in Switzerland
and not nearly as well in other places.
So let me make this important point.
So,
this, you know, the effectiveness of these, you
know,
nudges to get voters involved definitely depends on
execution.
So especially the information
There's kind of this expectation that, you know,
a party, you're choosing between parties
and you just pick the party that's the
best match to you.
But especially in the U.S., there are basically
two parties, you know, structurally, even
in other countries in Europe where there are
typically more parties, but still probably
none of them is a perfect fit for
many people.
And yeah, so, you know, you'd like to
vote with one party on, you know, kind of on certain
things and vote in another way on other
things.
And well, you know, you often have limited
ways to do that.
Of course, there are, you know, tweaks and
things to even to the representative democracy
mechanisms, which are actually fairly common in Europe
that allow you to sometimes, you
know, tweak your way through that a little
bit.
But still, it's, you know, your choices tend
to be more limited, whereas in direct democracy,
yeah, you're voting directly on each option.
So you kind of have a high-dimensional decision
space in principle.
You can vote exactly the way you want,
not be bound to find the closest approximate party
match or representative match.
So yeah, in principle, that's good.
It keeps the voters' choice as a rich
information space, not narrowing it, over-compressing
it into one little choice.
Yes?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Good.
Yeah.
Very good point as well.
Yeah.
You know what?
So, you know, a basic problem with representative
democracy is there's a certain, there's at
least one, you know, a few biases that
practically all representatives have in representative
democracy, which is, you know, they're the type
of people who want to get reelected.
This is a particular type of person, you
know?
All of the representatives on all of the
career politicians on all parties tend to have this
at least in common, you know, they all
want to get reelected.
They all want to play the, you know,
the political game and get power.
And this, you know, this places in this
respect and in a lot of things it affects, you know,
this makes them actually not very representative of
the overall population in, you know, what
they actually spend most of their time doing,
thinking about their attitudes and things
like that.
They're a biased sample, a very self-selecting bias
sample.
Yep.
So, this is definitely an issue.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, you know, both direct democracy and representative
democracy have their, you know, their own
idea, have their issue.
They have their attraction, but their issue.
Now, coming back to liquid democracy, what is
the basic idea of liquid democracy?
Well, the basic question is, well, can we
kind of get the best of both worlds, of both
of these models in some way?
Right?
So, the basic idea is to try to
give voters individual choice, right?
On, say, on a given issue, whether to,
say, either vote, either, you know, pay attention,
get involved, debate, enter the debate, the discussion,
and ultimately vote directly on
a particular issue, or else say, well, I
don't have time, interest, too complex, whatever,
whatever combination of reasons, I don't want to
get directly involved in this issue.
I choose on this particular issue to delegate
voting power, delegate my vote on that issue
to a representative, importantly, on that issue.
Right.
And the real key here is on different
issues.
Different choices are possible, right?
can decide to get involved in this issue
and vote directly, participate, vote directly,
and not on these others, delegate on these
others.
And on the issues you choose to delegate
on, you can delegate to different people.
Here's someone I trust to represent me on
topics of healthcare, and here's someone else
different who I choose to, who I think
represents me well on economics or stuff like that.
Yeah. Good. So I think if I'm understanding
you correctly, you're bringing up basically
the problem of vote privacy and, you know,
especially in the context of liquid democracy,
right? So yeah, so this is a vote
privacy and coercion vote buying.
This is, well, this is already a problem
with, you know, normal, you know, non-liquid democracy,
but yeah, there's a strong argument it can
be a bigger problem. Liquid democracy can make it a
much bigger problem if we're not careful. Yeah.
And so that's one of the important issues I want
to come up with. Let's, before we come
back to this, and feel free to throw other, you know,
questions on the issues board because there are
a number of interesting issues with liquid
democracy. But first, you know, just to kind
of finish defining it, you know, kind of what is the
basic idea? Well, you know, there's no single
definitive formulation, actually. You know,
this is kind of the core of it,
that, you know, we're kind of trying to give people more individual
choice on, you know, what to like, kind
of give everybody the choice that like, if you do want
to vote directly and participate directly and vote
directly on every single issue and topic,
then it just kind of, for you, it
devolves into a kind of the ideal direct democracy where, yeah,
you get to participate directly on everything and
you apparently have time and interest to do that.
So good, good job, right? That's great for
you. On the other hand, it also, you know, addresses this,
you know, unfairness or, you know, kind of
this issue of over expectation of people's time and
attention, right? So, so, so it's trying to
manage demands of time, attention,
interest, just recognizing the reality of the situation
that people are not going to be equal,
you know, in time, attention and interest and,
you know, some people will want to delegate more,
some less on particular issues or all of
the issues and, you know, basically try to say, okay,
you know, this is your democracy and here,
you know, here's, you can play it close to your chest,
you can get involved in everything or you
can get involved in not much and like, you know,
leave it to other people or any combination,
right? So that's kind of the ideal that we're,
that liquid democracy is trying to achieve, right?
Now, before we get into the issues,
other questions or kind of thoughts about the
basic idea? Well, how does this work?
All right, Howard. Now, maybe I'll, maybe I'll
mention a little bit of the history.
So this is, this idea is not exactly
very new by some,
in, in, in some form, it goes all
the way back to Lewis Carroll, who also wrote Alice in Wonderland,
and who also had some, a lot of
ideas on parliamentary procedures and stuff and he
introduced this idea of clubbing, clubbing votes, combining
votes. I'm not sure it was exactly
this, but it was something, you know, if
you squint a little, it was something like this,
right? So Lewis Carroll, back in the 1800s,
something had something, thought about something
like this. How do you spell how many
R's and how many L's? I totally can't remember.
And then more recent, a little bit more
recently, back in the 1960s, there was a political scientist,
Gordon Moore, I believe, who, who had the
idea of using proxy voting somewhat like this.
He still intended that, you know, people would
be voting in person, kind of a more conventional,
but, but, you know, if you don't want
to vote directly, well, you can send a proxy,
kind of like you can already do for,
in many companies, for boardroom voting. And this is,
this is kind of the big precedent. So
corporate boardroom
votes, right? When you're electing a new CEO
or, you know, trying to kick out the current CEO or,
you know, something like that, proxy voting has
kind of been a standard, a fairly standard thing
for a very long time. Dealing with the
realities that, well, a lot of the shareholders, especially
the big shareholders have absolutely no time and
are never going to show up. And, you know, if you
want any effective voting at all, you kind
of have to have some kind of proxy thing going on, right?
So it's kind of, kind of in that
context, it's just like, you know, just demand, but, but then,
you know, kind of we see hints of
this, you know, idea, you know, people saying, well,
maybe this isn't such a terrible idea for
actual, you know, political democracy too.
But then, yeah, so, so there were flavors
of this, but then in, so basically 2000, starting in 2002,
and then, you know, years after that, a
bunch of people, including me, started writing,
reinventing this idea over and over without knowing
about each other, mostly.
In the, in the intervening years, this is
kind of, this was kind of in the peer to peer
period, everybody was interested in peer to peer
networks and things like that.
And there was kind of a sudden explosion
of interest in this, this general idea.
And this is also when the term liquid
democracy was coined, because Lewis Carroll and Gordon
Moore definitely didn't use that term. I believe
the term came in around 2003 by an anonymous
poster on some board that is kind of
like Satoshi Nakamoto, I don't know who it was,
that first introduced this term liquid democracy.
But, and I haven't heard of anybody even
claiming to know who exactly this, this was,
went by the name, the pseudonym, Psyche. But
anyway, and, but, you know, that term caught on.
And, but in any way, you know, since
then it's been, it's been going around, especially in kind
of technology, you know, the circles of people
interested in how technology and democracy
intersect. And it's been tried, you know, quite
a few times in different projects.
And of course, the biggest experiment, you know,
which is one of the readings,
was of course the German, German pirate party,
which had officially implemented and adopted a form
of liquid democracy called liquid feedback.
In their, in their online kind of very
kind of cat focused online platform for discussion stuff.
And some things went well with that, some
things went not so well with that. That's an interesting
story. And then in the paper I assigned
as well as other papers on that experience.
But yeah, so one of quite a few
experiments. And of course, there's a lot, a lot of variations
in these, these ideas too. There's a lot
of detailed differences between different specific
approaches. So yeah, we'll get into the issues,
interesting issues next. Any other, you know,
questions on the, the basic idea before we
do. Okay, if not, I saw it looks like it's about
time for the break. So let's, let's go
ahead and take the break. And then we'll come back and focus on
these, these questions. Let's see. Yeah. And so
important things that I haven't mentioned yet
that are how do you do delegation, for
example, is delegation transitive.
And you split a delegate delegation.
So there's,
there's more questions than that, just a couple
things to start thinking about.
Okay, so I'll, I'll see you back here
in 15 minutes. Okay, shall we continue?
Yeah, so potential or real issues with liquid
democracy. So we already have a couple here.
There's actually a third that I want to
bring up that that became kind of a
kind of kind of at least a perceived
issue when the German pirate party was using liquid
democracy. Any of you from Germany? Any of
you have heard of this before?
I know some, some colleagues who were actually
in members of the German pirate party when this,
when they were doing, doing this experiment. And
so the reports are certainly interesting.
Like I said, it, you know, partly worked,
partly, partly didn't.
One of the interesting things that happened, and
you can find articles on this, I can't remember
if it's one of the, one of the
optional readings. For a while, a particular, I think professor,
professor there in Germany started accumulated a lot
of delegated voting power. Apparently,
just because a lot of party members saw
him as like the real authority on a lot of things,
like just like, you know, kind of everybody
was saying, well, this is, he's the authority,
let's delegate to him. And so many people
are delegating to him. You know, they started calling
him the most powerful pirate. The, the, and
so, so the question was, you know, even if he wasn't,
you know, trying to do anything bad or
anything, was this one person getting too much
concentrated voting power? Is there, should we be
concerned about a
constant
tracen of voting power?
Right? Because, well, if you let people do
whatever they want to, you know, with kind of
complete freedom, and one of the bits of
freedom they have is to delegate their vote. And if they
all want to, they can all delegate their
vote to the same person if they want to, if it's a
celebrity they all like or something like that.
And maybe you can accidentally, you know,
vote in a dictator that way, right? That
person has all the, you know, majority of the voting power,
then they can just do whatever they want
now, right? Is this a problem?
Yeah.
Good.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Good.
Good.
So you're, so I think, you know, so
you're getting to this transitive delegate delegation
question, you know, should delegation be transitive?
And you know, in particular, you know, this,
you know, I think you're making the argument
that transitive delegation might at least contribute to
a potential risk of concentration
of voting power, right?
You know, I, I didn't intend my vote
to concentrate into the accidental dictator that we're all
choosing, but well, it just so happens that,
you know, a lot of people, you know, kind
of delegate to someone who delegates to someone
who delegates to this accidental dictator,
right?
And yeah, maybe if that's a, maybe if
that's a bad outcome and transitive delegation makes
that bad outcome worse, then, you know, maybe
transitive delegation is not such a great
idea.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So that's, you know, that's one of the
arguments against transitive delegation.
And, you know, and in fact, even, you
know, with that, so, so, you know, when I was formulating,
you know, my proposal, my ideas for liquid
democracy, it did include trans transitive
delegation.
And most of our, most of the, you
know, as computer science geeky computer science types,
transitive comes naturally.
So it kind of feels weird without transitive
delegation.
But, you know, maybe from a pure social
perspective, you know, there's, there's arguments that,
well, you know, maybe, maybe transitive shouldn't automatically
be assumed, especially like,
you know, as you mentioned, trust may not
be transitive.
I might trust you to make this decision
yourself if you want to.
But if you don't, then maybe I don't
trust you to, to delay and decide where to delegate
my vote transitively.
Right.
Yeah.
Now, there are actually other variations that have
been considered that don't have transitive
delegation.
Another, another approach.
So in some, some approaches to liquid democracy,
you imagine, well, you, you can, you can indicate
a kind of a rank choice list of
potential delegates to wield your vote.
But if, if say you delegate your top
choice delegate is, you know, delegate to Bob, but
then Bob does not vote on this issue,
then the vote just comes back to you and then goes
bumps down to your next choice candidate.
And if they, if they exercise your vote,
then, then you vote their way.
And otherwise it comes back to you and
goes to your third choice is if you had fun and
so I kind of, kind of like a
instant runoff voting kind of, kind of thing only with delegation.
So, you know, so you could say, you
could argue that, well, that's, that's keeping the
power, you know, you know, you're not relying
on transitively, but you, you, you still have
kind of multiple chances to have your vote
exercised by someone you more or less trust,
you know, even if it's not your first
choice.
Right.
I can't think of, you know, so, so
this, this variation has been for quite a while.
I'm not sure if it has been implemented
or, or actually tested.
Yeah, but, but on the other hand, there
are definitely arguments for transitive delegation
to.
Can you think of any particular arguments?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, but you know what?
A lot of people, I think you're right,
but you know, a lot of people are too modest.
Right.
So, maybe you don't think you know anything
about road construction, but maybe they think
you know more than they do about road
construction.
Because yeah, maybe you have at least shown
that you paid attention to the local potholes
and complained about them and kind of know
what's going on.
Right.
So, maybe you are a little bit more
expert than those who are delegating to you, at least
from their perspective.
And maybe they trust you more, at least
more directly than the big top expert who is, you
know, sitting in that comfy chair in the
downtown office, who they totally don't trust, even
though yeah, everybody knows he's the expert.
Right.
So, you see the point, right?
You know, there's kind of in making delegation
decisions, you know, or representative choice
decisions, there's this inherent tension between, well, how
do you choose who is the
best expert, you know, who is most deeply
into that subject?
Yeah, you know, versus who is closest to
you in terms of representation and trust?
Who do you trust most?
Who, you know, who, right?
And so someone who's closer to you, even
though you totally don't know, they're not, you know,
they're not, you know, the world's top expert
on road construction or whatever, but they're
close to you.
You trust them.
And you know, you think, yeah, they totally
represent you more than, you know, kind of
the, you know, kind of the expert downtown
or, you know, kind of in the next state or
whatever, who you've never actually met, but you
only heard of, right?
But here's where the work, to me, the
nice argument for transitivity comes into play,
building on that.
It gives people the option of voting that
way.
Kind of exactly as you mentioned, but I'm
trying to, you know, fill out the argument
for why it might actually be a good
idea.
Yeah, your neighbors, you know, they don't really
think you're the world's top expert
on road construction, but maybe they correctly trust
you more than the world's top expert
and think you'll do a good job of
sending their vote to a good place.
But you will choose the expert in the
easy chair there, or maybe you'll do something
unexpected.
You maybe you'll find a different expert and
your vote will go that way and maybe that's
better because it actually represents your community better,
you know?
So you don't need to be a top
expert.
You just have to be a little bit
better and then, you know, help the vote along to a good
place for it to be.
Right?
Yeah.
So basically, in transitivity, there's both con arguments
and pro arguments.
These are some of each, right?
So the con is trust actually transitive.
It may not be, right?
And yeah, as we discussed, but on the
pro, it might be a more effective voting power
to help vote, find good, and most importantly
trustworthy representatives, right, for their
interests, right?
Whether it's the farmer and collective or kind
of sending the road construct in view,
vote to you just because you might be
just a little bit better place to find the real
expert.
And you don't even need to find the
real expert.
You need to just find someone a little
bit more expert than you, and maybe they will know
who their real expert is, right?
So you can, you know, passing the buck
a few times is a very powerful mechanism, potentially.
Yeah.
Ah, great question.
Okay, I'm glad you brought that up.
So delegation cycles.
Yeah, that can totally happen.
What do we do when it does?
Yeah, and what does it mean?
Good.
Yeah, yeah.
So yeah, so yeah, let's, in fact, we
can make that the next topic.
So again, different formulations of liquid derived.
Oh, yeah, you wanted to say something, right?
I'll be president delegation in the middle ground
between different middle ground between
direct and representative.
Yeah, yeah, I think that's there.
But, and of course, you could say that,
well, you know, to still hop to the president delegation
is okay, but not three.
You know, we could always set a bath
if you want to, you know, but then, you know, where
exactly do you set the van?
What's the principle by which you set a
particular down, you know, when one down as opposed to
other.
And so that's, you know, maybe on the
kind of on the pro transitive delegation, you could
you could just say, you know, kind of,
you know, kind of conceptual generality.
Because, you know, if if there's no obvious,
you know, kind of reason or justification to
set a particular bound, well, why should it?
Why should it be bound?
Right.
On the other hand, there's the arguments we
brought up that, you know, trust is not necessarily
transitive.
And, you know, maybe does does it contribute?
Does transitive daily delegation contribute to concentration of
voting power, which might
be a bad thing.
And, you know, these other things, right.
You know, maybe two hops won't contribute too
much to to concentration of voting power,
but one hot, you know, but three hops
would.
And so yeah, maybe that could be a
basis for setting a particular thing.
But then it seems like we would need
some extensive experience, you know, studies, I know how people
actually use this and we only have we
have some but not that much yet.
And we don't have, you know, nobody's done
experiments where, you know, they have had
an A, B testing with computer communities, A,
B and C, where community A has no transitive
delegation and community B has one hop transfer
or two hops transit, you know, nobody's done
that yet.
That's future work.
So, yeah, so these are kind of open
questions.
Good.
Important open questions.
Nobody knows how to how to do liquid
democracy yet for definitively.
Yeah.
Or even like like Donald Trump
Yeah
Yeah
Right, right so
Exactly, so I think this is a general
argument that we should somehow control concentration of voting power, right?
Because anyone whether Taylor Swift or Donald Trump
or anyone who you know
Who somehow gets a lot of concentrated power
is a point of potential corruption
And I know, you know Taylor Swift would
never ever be, you know, corruptible, but
So
Yeah, you know, this is this is uh,
you know a very good point and so
uh, yeah, so if we meet and
So that that goes into the process now
transit
You know the transitive or not question is
not the only one that feeds into this concentration question though, for example
um
Can you split so so how what kind
of choice do you make again?
You different different
Formulations of liquid democracy make two choices in
this way some just say okay. Do you delegate? Okay make one choice
You know delegate you re delegate all your
voting power to this one
Delegate and that's the choice you've made or
you or you vote with it, right?
kind of binary, right
um
Other formulations as I mentioned, you know kind
of you might have a rank choice
Well, if your top choice doesn't end up
using your vote, then it goes to your your second choice and so on
um, but there's also approaches
um
That allow you to split your delegating vote
Which basically basically means
So an example of this
Is what uh, what's called viscous democracy?
Uh, there's I think uh, at least I
think I had a paper in the optional readings on on this
um
where well you
You know you trust actually you you trust
several people and you're not actually sure who's the best expert on this
Um, but you just say okay
I know three people who I think are
a little bit better than myself
Experts than than myself on this
I'm just going to choose all of them
and my vote my voting power gets basically split into three three parts each of them
gets one of those three parts
To delegate right and you know assuming this
is kind of uh assisted by you know kind of
Appropriately technology assisted. Well, you know the computer
figures out what that means in terms of how much delegated voting power
each of these out each of these delegates
get right so of course the uh
The uh the actual graph and what happens
gets a little bit more complicated, but you know arguably
um
We can still do something reasonably uh with
it. Um
But
Well, you know, what are uh, why why
might you want to split? Why might you not want to split?
Yeah
you a little bit, then they all agree
a little bit,
or maybe the other person.
All right, so different topics, different decisions.
So the delegation splitting I'm referring to here
is like even on just on one topic,
you know, kind of, yeah, low construction, something.
We're not sure actually who to delegate to,
and we think you may be knowing a
couple,
two or three people that you know,
you're kind of inclined to delegate to,
but I'm not sure which is the best.
So that's one of the absolutely important concerns.
If you allow this, is it just gonna
be turned out
to be a huge complicated computational mess?
Because yeah, voting power is going to,
if most people do this, each person's vote
is gonna split into smaller and smaller pieces
as it propagates out this graph, right?
And is that gonna be computationally insane
the power to split your vote affecting that?
Because to me, it seems like that's the
group of people
that yeah, it's gonna exist regardless.
But if you have the choice to split
your vote,
but then you're totally not even paying attention
to that,
you just say, oh, I just delegate everything
to this person
without thinking, you're probably not gonna use that
choice
to split your vote, right?
So it seems like this is gonna be
the set of potential users
who are totally not gonna use that.
And then there's another set of users who
different
from those who might actually choose to split
their vote,
right?
Yeah, yeah, so, but I mean,
that kind of this group of like,
kind of the I don't care, the apathetic
voter group,
this is important, we need to think about
that,
but I'm not sure that that affects
this vote splitting decision, yeah.
trust in that or 50-50 or 30-30-30,
hit 33-30-30-30-30 or something, right?
And yeah, it would just be nice to
be able to express that
if you have that.
On the other hand, yeah, you might be
a part
of the apathetic voter group and just say,
okay, delegate everything to my dad or whatever,
and that's fine, it's your choice, right?
But yeah, so there's an expressiveness
argument for splitting.
Another argument comes back to this concentration
of power thing.
In particular, like, considering this German
pirate party experience, could it have been that
for a lot of people, well, a lot
of people knew
this professor and a lot of people knew
other people
that they trusted too, but, you know,
and if they had the ability to pick
two, three,
or four people to express their trust,
to express kind of the breadth of trust
that they actually have, you know,
they might have spread out their voting power,
you know, in that way, but because the
system
gave them only one choice, you know,
you either delegate to one person or you
don't delegate
at all or you don't delegate at all,
you cast a vote or just lose your
vote, right?
And given that, you know, one choice,
well, you know, this professor was the, you
know,
clearly the kind of the, you know, kind
of,
a lot of people thought, well, this was
the most expert
in this area, even though, you know,
there was probably other people not far behind
them,
but, you know, but because it was kind
of a winner-take-all
choice, well, the, you know, the professor got
all
of that voting power and the second and
third, you know,
choices got zero, right?
In terms of the delegated voting power, right?
So I think a question for future work,
which unfortunately there hasn't been research yet.
And I see this, you know, I want
somebody to do research
on this, maybe, maybe we'll get to it
in my lab at some point,
maybe not, I don't know, to figure out,
you know,
what the effect of, you know, having the
split delegation
as an option actually has on observed potential
concentrations
of voting power, right?
Is that a natural mis-mitigation,
just allowing people to express their true distribution
of trust preferences, as opposed to forcing them
into a winner-take-all kind of choice, you know,
how much could that, could that alone mitigate
the concentration
of voting power issue?
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, so that would be, you know, one
of your choices
in this setting to donate part of your
voting power to, you know,
to say, you know, a community whose causes
you support,
even if you don't see yourself as part
of that community, right?
But also, another aspect to that that kind
of goes the other way,
that's also important, a lot of under-representative communities
are also not at all without supporters outside
of their communities, right?
And even delegating, you know, delegating your vote
to,
you know, not even within a particular under-representative
community, but just to a person who you
think, you know,
you think they have a broad perspective of
people's interests
and, you know, they pay attention to these,
you know, this and that
and, you know, these under-representative communities
because they do, right?
Then you are, you know, kind of that's
a way in which you might,
in effect, be supporting those because they are
also, you know,
kind of the, you know, the representatives are
legitimately
trying to represent the interests of their broader,
you know,
constituency, including the under-representative minorities.
And this is, you know, this is not
new or unique to liquid democracy
that this happens, you know, happens all the
time
in regular, well-functioning representative democracies
where, you know, even though some minorities, you
know,
do not, you know, are not big enough
to have their own voting power, right?
Their own seats really on the table, but
nevertheless, they aren't
always ignored, you know, in part because some
of the, you know,
representatives who are actually doing their jobs of
trying to represent
broadly their population actually pay attention.
And so, yeah, you know, in multiple ways.
In principle, liquid democracy could express those kinds
of
cooperations more explicitly, but, you know, to be
tested, right?
We don't yet know for sure how well,
you know, that will work.
It's just, you know, it could work, you
know, hopefully.
Okay, so I want to get to, yeah,
actually we have the vote privacy and
coercion and the delegation cycles issue.
So these are, and we're unfortunately running out
of time.
I could talk about this all day and
I wish I had time to, but
so voting privacy, this is a very important
issue and there has to be a,
you know, some kind of, you know, for
a liquid democracy to fly,
there has to be some approach to that.
And I don't, again, I don't know of
an ideal approach.
There are some that, you know, kind of
arguably are not bad.
One is, one is it would be to
back off on the freedom angle, the individual
freedom angle a bit and say, well, there
has to be a kind of a threshold test for,
you have to get this many delegated votes
before you can exercise any of them, right?
Kind of, you know, this is analogous to
the threshold test that most countries impose
on political parties, right?
You have to have this many members, this
many signatures and so on to have your party
on the ballot at all, right?
But so, yeah, one might imagine a similar
thing, you know, there.
So, you know, you have to, your prominence,
you know, popularity, whatever you want to
call it has to be above this threshold
before you get to, you know, become a delegate and
exercise delegated votes.
And the hope is that by the time
you reach that threshold, you're hopefully at least a
little less corruptible than, you know, than, you
know, kind of every, the average voter,
right? You know, that's a big if of
course.
But then, you know, kind of, yeah, go
ahead.
Yeah.
Yeah, so exactly.
So there's a question, well, even if you
impose the threshold, what would the right
threshold be, you know, if you make the
threshold big enough to, you know, to address these kinds
of, you know, kind of domestic coercion situations,
then, well, the threshold, yeah, you can set the
threshold higher, but then will that, you know,
kind of reduce everybody's legitimate choice by
that much so that, you know, kind of
everybody has only big shot delegate, more big shot
delegates to choose from, right? So that would
be, you know, kind of, you know, so one perspective
as well, maybe this is an unavoidable tradeoff.
On the other hand, there are different solutions
too, right? That's, that's only one of several
solutions. You know, none of them are perfect
that I know of, but another one, see
how try this on precise. Consider, consider everybody to,
so all delegated votes are public, but all
individual votes are private, a system where
basically everyone, everyone who is willing or ever
exercises delegated voting power, well,
the way I vote in public, that's, you
know, I cast a public vote and I also cast a private vote.
And my public vote is basically my public
declaration of where, you know, what my position
is as if I were a political party,
right? So everybody can be their own political party,
but the party's vote is public, right? For
accountability, right? But I and everyone also
have a private vote and the private vote
is always private, right? And, and, you know, you,
you don't give that up by being a
delegate, even if you are a delicate, right? So somebody can,
so the idea here is, you know, yeah,
somebody can potentially buy your delegated vote, you know,
kind of coerce you or incentivize you to
make a public statement saying, you know, I support this
astroturfing campaign or, you know, whatever. But you
don't need to cast your private vote for
your own astroturfing campaign. You know, you can
vote privately for, no, I privately vote for,
for, you know, what I actually believe in
and everyone who might vote for your astroturfing
campaign also makes that private choice, right? Of
course, you know, then, then we get it, you know,
still get into the question of, well, how
much are you, you know, basically contributing to a,
you know, kind of bad corrupt influence campaign
that might trick people into, you know, making bad
decisions? But, you know, I arguably, that's an
important separate problem that any, you know,
that's present in most any democracy that I'm
aware of, right? How do, how do people, you know,
decide how to vote even when they have
a free choice, how to do that, right? But anyway, right,
so, so you see, you know, you see
how, how if you conceptually separate the public and private
part of each voter's vote, you know, in
principle, you know, each voter can have a public vote and
a separate private vote, right? And, and you
can, at least in principle, ensure that freedom and the
coerce, you know, just with, you know, again,
with some copyouts. Does that make sense?
But yeah, again, there's other, other takes on
that too that are worth considering. Delegation
cycles though, right? How do, how do we
deal with cycle? This is actually, and, and also, so,
so also the computational thing issue that you
brought up. So this is an issue that, you know,
viscous democracy has, has looked into, and, you
know, there's ways to adapt algorithms like Google's
page, page rank to do things like this,
including and viscous democracy is really kind of a page
rank inspired approach. And it uses the same
idea of resistance or loss, you know, when you, when
there's a multi hop, you know, transitive delegation,
voting power, a little bit of some
fraction of voting power gets lost at each
step, right? So you do have transitive delegation,
but there's a cost to that transitivity. You're,
you know, you lose some voting power, it's not a
perfect transitivity, right? And it just turns out
that, well, that, that proves to be a not,
not too hard, easy way of dealing with
the both, both the computational costs and the,
and the delegation cycle problem, right? Because if
you have a cycle, well, you know,
kind of the vote just flows through the
cycle until it, you know, and diminishes until it
disappears, becomes negligible. And well, let page rank
deal with it. Yeah.
Yeah, maybe not. Yeah, but then exactly. So
that might be your intent. But if we're voting at the
same time without knowing how each other is
voting, then this becomes a strategic voting
issue. And usually we, we like to avoid
people, you know, even imposing on people the, the perceived
need to vote strategically to avoid bad things
happening with their vote, such as just getting
caught in a cycle, right? So yeah, indeed,
I am not happy with, you know, with, you know, either
expecting people to avoid cycles proactively by knowing
what everybody else is doing, right? Or
to, to risk, you know, your voting power
get lost either accidentally or through this
cyclic resistance that, you know, so actually what,
what are the things, so just last semester,
a visiting student who took last year's version
of this course did a very nice bachelor's project.
He was a visiting from, from Munich, Germany.
And he was looking specifically at this, at handling
delegation cycles with, with split delegation. And he
looked at it from with, with three different
approaches, but, but basically trying to, trying to
create an approach that does not rely on
resistive, you know, kind of loss, loss of
voting power. And it turns out one way to deal with this
is, you know, who's heard of LP, linear
programming or LP solving, right? Yeah. So you just set this
up the right way. And this is basically
a linear programming problem. It's a, in fact, it's even,
it can simply, it's even a pretty simple,
you know, linear programming problem. It's a special case
that can be handled even more, even more
efficiently. Even with the, you know, with the cycle issue. So,
so you can set up the cycle, you
know, I'm not going to have time in the next one minute to
deal with that, but describe it in particular.
But, you know, you can, you can set it up as a
linear programming problem. And it essentially just factors
out the cycles, like, you know,
it allows the votes to flow, it, you
know, kind of pretends the votes are infinitely flowing,
nothing ever gets lost. But, you know, kind
of, there, there's kind of a, you know,
conceptually infinite flow of votes over an infinite
amount of time. And you kind of average
out everything happened that happens over that infinite
amount of time. And of course,
a bunch of votes are constantly flowing through
these cycles, but they're not getting lost. And,
you know, you're just kind of computing the,
the equilibrium over an infinite amount of time.
And it kind of works. His thesis is
online on my website, if anyone's interested. Anyway,
yeah, you had one more. Yeah.
Yeah.
Maybe. Yeah. So that might be a way
to avoid. Yeah, there might be cycle avoidance strategies
like that. I think I, this rings a
bell, I would have to look, look back at it more, more closely
to think about, you know, whether that would
really solve this or not. But yeah, anyway, so there's
this was David Holtzworth's thesis. Anyway, there, there
is, you know, delegations cycles are a real
problem, but they seem to be solvable in
a variety of ways anyway. And so, and, and, you know, there's,
there's other issues that I could bring up
that, you know, so again, the liquid democracy is,
you know, not mature yet. Nobody knows how
to get it right yet, or, you know, whether it's a good,
good idea or a bad idea in the
long term, but, you know, it seems, seems promising. And the thought of
is, and the experience is gradually evolving. So
I hope you at least find the couple of
signed papers interesting and happy to discuss further.
Anyway, and so, you know, next week,
we'll start and continue looking at other innovations
in this, in this space. So yeah,
thank you. And so, see you next week.
