Proceedings of the Ninth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media

Voting Behaviour and Power in Online Democracy:
A Study of LiquidFeedback in Germany’s Pirate Party
Christoph Carl Kling1 Jérôme Kunegis1
Heinrich Hartmann1 Markus Strohmaier1,2 Steffen Staab1
1

2

University of Koblenz–Landau, Rhabanusstraße 3 , 55118 Mainz, Germany
GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Unter Sachsenhausen 6–8, 50667 Cologne, Germany
{ckling,kunegis,hartmann,strohmaier,staab}@uni-koblenz.de
Abstract

setting is crucial for studying voting behaviour in real life
political movements and for validating research on voting
behaviour and measures of power (Loewenstein 1999). Yet,
this kind of data has historically been elusive to researchers.
LiquidFeedback represents a popular platform which implements support for delegative democracy. In contrast to a
representative democracy, all voters in a delegative democracy in principle are equal. Each voter can delegate his vote
to another voter, raising the voting weight of the delegate
by one. The delegate again can delegate his voting weight
to a third user and so forth, creating a transitive delegation
chain. A key innovation of delegative democracy platforms
is the ability of every voter to revoke his delegated votes at
any point, preserving full control over his votes and allowing for the emergence of dynamic delegation structures in
contrast to representative voting systems. Votes are public
and pseudonymous, and therefore both individual and collective voting behaviour can be analysed. A common objection against the use of these platforms is the nature of delegations, as they can potentially give rise to so-called supervoters, i.e., powerful users who receive many delegations.
It has been asserted in the past that the presence of these
super-voters undermines the democratic process, and therefore delegative democracy should be avoided.
Problem. In order to assess the true potential and limitations
of delegative democracy platforms to facilitate political discourse and agenda setting, we first need to understand the
behaviour of voters and super-voters, and the power they
wield. Tapping into the complete voting history and delegation network from world’s largest delegative democracy
platform (operated by the German Pirate Party), we want to
understand (i) voting behaviour: how people vote in delegative democracy platforms such as LiquidFeedback, and how
they delegate votes to super-voters. Based on these insights,
we want to study the (ii) voting power: how power can be
assessed in online democracy systems and how it is used.
Approach. We tackle these problems by analysing the voting behaviour of members of the German Pirate Party from
2009–2013. The German Pirate Party has adopted LiquidFeedback as their online delegative democracy platform of
choice. We look at the delegation network of users over time
and identify the emergence of power structures and supervoters within the party. Next, we discuss and apply a series
of established power indices from game theory and political

In recent years, political parties have adopted Online Delegative Democracy platforms such as LiquidFeedback to organise themselves and their political agendas via a grassroots approach. A common objection against the use of these platforms is the delegation system, where a user can delegate
his vote to another user, giving rise to so-called super-voters,
i.e. powerful users who receive many delegations. It has been
asserted in the past that the presence of these super-voters
undermines the democratic process, and therefore delegative
democracy should be avoided. In this paper, we look at the
emergence of super-voters in the largest delegative online
democracy platform worldwide, operated by Germany’s Pirate Party. We investigate the distribution of power within the
party systematically, study whether super-voters exist, and
explore the influence they have on the outcome of votings
conducted online. While we find that the theoretical power
of super-voters is indeed high, we also observe that they use
their power wisely. Super-voters do not fully act on their
power to change the outcome of votes, but they vote in favour
of proposals with the majority of voters in many cases thereby
exhibiting a stabilising effect on the system. We use these
findings to present a novel class of power indices that considers observed voting biases and gives significantly better
predictions than state-of-the-art measures.

Introduction
In the last decade, the World Wide Web has increasingly
been adopted for facilitating political processes and conversations (Lietz et al. 2014). The Web has also sparked
the development of novel voting and democracy platforms
impacting both societal and political processes. Today, a
wide range of online voting platforms are available, based
on different democratic methods such as consensual decision making, liquid democracy (Paulin 2014) or dynamically
distributed democracy (Tenorio-Fornés and Hassan 2014).
These platforms are becoming increasingly popular and political movements and parties have started adopting them to
open up and facilitate political coordination. In contrast to
experimental data or simulations (e.g. from game theory),
the behaviour of voters on these platform is realistic, i.e. voting takes place in a natural environment and the decisions of
voters have a real political impact. Having such a natural
Copyright c 2015, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

208

12000
Active Users

10000
8000

180d after fed.
party congress

6000
4000
2000
0

(a) Delegation network

Federal election

Electoral success Berlin
2011

2012

2013

2014

(b) User activity

Figure 1: (a) The delegation network. A node denotes a user of LiquidFeedback (a Pirate Party member), edges denote delegations. Red edges denote removed delegations. Node size and color correspond to the number of delegations received by other
users. The layout was computed using the dominant eigenvectors of the network’s stochastic adjacency matrix. We can observe
(i) the emergence of a large connected component of users and (ii) the existence of super-voters, i.e. voters that have received
a large number of delegations. (b) User activity. Active users on the LiquidFeedback platform of the German Pirate Party over
time. Users are labelled inactive after 180 days without login. Several events led to a rise and decrease in activity.
science theory (specifically the Shapley and Banzhaf power
index (Shapley 1954; Banzhaf 1965)) to assess the theoretical power of super voters. Then, we compare the theoretical
power of super voters with their potential as well as their
exercised power based on real world voting data. Our analysis reveals a clear gap between existing theoretical power
indices and actual user voting behaviour. As a result, we develop and present a new class of power indices that better
captures voting behaviour. We evaluate the proposed power
indices with data from the LiquidFeedback platform.

the evaluation of voting tools for public participation to support traditional democratic systems (Watkins and Rodriguez
2008). The availability of large-scale datasets on individual voting behaviour in non-political online communities
enabled the exploration of latent mechanisms behind individual voting decisions. One interesting pattern is the rating bias found in online voting systems. In (Kostakos 2009),
Amazon, IMDB and BookCrossing show a systematic tendency towards positive (Amazon and IMDB) or negative
(BookCrossing) ratings which approximately follows a beta
distribution. Another aspect of online voting systems is the
impact of the similarity between voters and the voted candidates in elections of persons. For instance, in (Leskovec,
Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010), a positive impact of user
similarity on the support of a candidate was found in the
promotion process of Wikipedia administrators. In (Muchnik, Aral, and Taylor 2013), herding effects were discovered in experimental settings, showing a significant impact
of prior positive ratings of comments in an online community. Comments which already received a positive vote were
more likely to receive a positive vote by other users.
All these findings were based on democratic voting systems with equal power distributions. In this paper, we look,
for the first time, at the aspect of power distributions in online voting systems with delegations.
Power Indices. Research on the distribution of power in
voting systems lead to the development of power indices.
Power indices are numerical indicators designed to measure
the ability of voters to influence voting outcomes. The most
common power indices are that of Shapley (1954) and that
of Banzhaf (1965). Both indices are based on game theory
and are mostly popular due to their simplicity. Other power
indices try to capture the parliamentary reality, e.g. by limiting the index to majorities by minimal coalitions (Deegan Jr and Packel 1978; Packel and Deegan Jr 1980). As voting weights change frequently in delegative democracies, no
fixed coalitions are formed and thus minimal coalitions are
just as likely as any other coalition.
Straffin (1977) gave a probabilistic formalisation of power
indices, analysed underlying assumptions and gave recom-

Contributions. This article makes two main contributions:
The first one is empirical: We provide unique insights into
the evolution of voting behaviour and power in an emerging political movement: Germany’s Pirate Party. Our analysis spans almost the entire life time of the party’s online
voting platform. We find that super-voters exist, that their
theoretical and potential power is high, but we also observe that they have a stabilising effect on the voting system and that they use their power wisely: Super-voters do
not fully act on their power to change the outcome of votes,
and they vote in favour of proposals with the majority of voters in many cases. These findings represent the basis for our
second contribution, which is methodological: We investigate the potential and limitations of existing power indices
from game theory and political science theory and identify
a gap between these models and what we observe in realworld data. Addressing this gap, we propose a novel class
of power indices that better captures voting behaviour. We
evaluate the proposed indices using real voting data from
the LiquidFeedback system. Via experiments, we demonstrate that the introduced power indices represent an improved way of characterizing the power of super voters in
delegative democracy platforms.

Related Work
Online Voting. Existing literature on online voting in the political setting is in part focused on the design of secure and
reliable voting mechanisms (Kohno et al. 2004), applications
for decision support (Robertson, Wania, and Park 2007) or

209

from August 13 2010 up to November 25 2013, spanning
1,200 days. The data is available to all party members.

mendations when to apply which index based on subjective
assessments of the assumptions. Gelman et al. criticised the
simplicity of the game-theoretic approaches by suggesting
an Ising model for modelling dependencies between voters, e.g. common administrative regions (Gelman, Katz, and
Tuerlinckx 2002). However, that study lacks the appropriate data for fitting the model as it relies on aggregated voting results and therefore cannot consider decisions at the individual level. In this paper, we show how to utilise userbased voting behaviour to derive adjusted power indices and
conduct the first objective evaluation of power indices on
large real-world voting data with constantly changing voting weights.
Delegative Democracy. First steps towards the direction of
a delegative democracy were published in 1884 by Charles
L. Dogson, better known under his pseudonym Lewis Carroll. In his book about the mathematical properties of voting mechanisms, he proposes a voting scheme where elected
candidates may delegate their votes to other candidates. The
delegated votes then can be further passed to other candidates (Dodgson 1884). A review of further works which
influenced the development of the concept of a delegative
democracy can be found in (Jabbusch 2011; Paulin 2014).
Based on these ideas, the novel concept of delegative voting was developed and recently popularised. A formalisation
of a delegative democratic system is given in (Yamakawa,
Yoshida, and Tsuchiya 2007). The implementation of delegative voting systems is non-trivial as loops in the delegation network have to be detected and resolved and regaining
votes potentially can affect a long delegation chain.
Democracy Platforms. Existing software implementations of delegative democracy include LiquidFeedback
(liquidfeedback.org), Agora Voting (agoravoting.com), GetOpinionated (github.com/getopinionated) and Democracy
OS (democracyos.org). In this paper, we study the online
voting platform of the German Pirate Party, which is based
on LiquidFeedback, a free software that implements an online platform in which votes can be conducted, and users
can delegate their vote to other users. LiquidFeedback was
adopted by the German Pirate Party in May 2010 (Paulin
2014) and has 13,836 users as of January 2015.
Pirate Parties. Pirate parties are an international political
movement with roots in Sweden (Fredriksson 2013), where
legal cases related to copyright law led to the formation of
a party advocating modern copyright laws and free access
to information (Miegel and Olsson 2008). The scope of the
party quickly broadened and nowadays active pirate parties
exist in 42 countries. The German Pirate Party is the largest
of all pirate parties with 24,438 members as of January 2015.

The LiquidFeedback Platform. We give a brief overview
over the most important processes and policies within the
system and refer to (Jabbusch 2011; Paulin 2014) for a more
detailed description. In LiquidFeedback as used in the German Pirate Party, members can create initiatives which are to
be voted on to obtain the current opinion of the party members, e.g. for collaboratively developing the party program.
Initiatives are grouped into issues which group competing
initiatives for the same issue. For instance, if a user proposes
an initiative to reduce the emission of CO2 by subsidising
the construction of wind turbines, another user could create
a competing initiative to subsidise solar fields. Furthermore,
issues belong to areas which represent main topics such as
environmental policies. Each user can create new initiatives,
which need a minimum first quorum of supporters for being voted upon. In LiquidFeedback, votes can be delegated
to other voters on three levels: On the global level, meaning
that all initiatives can be voted for by the delegate on behalf
of the delegating user; on the area level, so that delegations
are restricted on an area; or on the issue level. The actions of
every voter are recorded and public, allowing the control of
delegates at the expense of non-secret votes.
Dataset. In total, the dataset includes 499,009 single votes
for 6,517 initiatives belonging to 3,565 issues. Throughout the four-year observation period, a total of 14,964 delegations where made on the global, area or issue level,
constituting the delegation network (Fig. 1(a)). The number of active users over the observation period is shown in
Fig. 1(b). Usage of LiquidFeedback in the German Pirate
Party fluctuates with political events in the party. We observe a strong growth in active users after the electoral success of the Berlin Pirate Party in 2011, where 8.9% of the
votes were received. Another point of growth is observed
prior to the German federal election in 2012. 180 days after
the programmatic federal party congress in 2011, we see a
significant drop of active users, when the voting system was
used to prepare proposals for the party congress. After the
congress, a critical debate on the future role of delegative
democracy for the Pirate party started. In a discussion on
the effect on super-voters – i.e. users with a large share of
incoming delegations – the democratic nature of the system
was questioned, and many users became inactive.

Table 1: The LiquidFeedback dataset. Obtained from the
delegative democracy platform of the German Pirate Party.
Observation period
2010/08/13 – 2013/11/25
Votes
499,009
Users
13,836
Delegations
14,964
Proposals (Initiatives)
6,517
Issues
3,565
Areas
22

Description of the Dataset
The German Pirate Party maintains the largest installation
of LiquidFeedback with 13,836 registered users, and uses
the software to survey the opinion of members. The German Pirate Party’s installation of LiquidFeedback thus represents the largest online community implementing delegative democracy. In this study we use a complete dataset created from daily database dumps of that installation, ranging

210

150
100
50
0

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Voting Result

0.8

1

(a) Voting results of Initiatives

300
250
200
150
100
50
0

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Approval Rate

0.8

1

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

PDF Beta Distribution

Number of Users

Number of Initiatives

200

(b) Approval rates per User

Figure 2: Average approval rates per initiative and per user. An approval rate of 1 means maximum approval (all votes have
been positive), an approval rate of 0 means minimum approval (all votes have been negative). (a) Initiatives. The distribution
shows a strong voting bias with a first peak at an approval rate of around 0.75 and a smaller second peak at 0.90. (b) Users.
Histogram of approval rates of users who voted for more than 10 initiatives. We can approximate the per-user approval rate
with a beta distribution. Voters show a strong tendency towards approving initiatives with an expected approval rate of 0.71.

Voting Behaviour

views, but they often decide different than their voters in
past votes. Delegates in the system then are not expected to
represent the opinion of their voters and act independently,
giving them a high freedom of action.
Another factor in the power of users are voting results. If
votes are narrowly decided, even a small weight gives voters
the power to decide votes alone. A histogram for the frequency of voting results is shown in Fig. 2(a). We see that
the distribution is skewed towards positive results with its
peak at about 0.8. The distribution of support shows a striking similarity to the distribution of ratings in other online
communities as described by Kostakos (Kostakos 2009).

In the following, we study different aspects of voting behaviour using the complete voting history in our dataset and
the temporal delegation network.

Existence and Role of Super-voters
In order to explore whether super-voters exist, and whether
they wield an over-proportional influence in the system, we
calculate the exponent of the power law distributed weight
distribution of voters per issue, summing over global, area
and issue delegations. The power law exponent is 1.38, indicating that most voters have no delegations and a small
set of voters possesses a huge voting weight – the supervoters. There are only 38 voters with more than 100 delegations in the voting history, and we therefore exclude the
non-significant statistics for those voters from the figures of
this paper. The practical power of super-voters does not only
depend on their voting weight – it also depends on how often
a voter actually participates in votes. One could ask: Are delegates more active than normal users? We found the overall
activity of voters to be power law distributed with an exponent of 1.87 and a median of 8. 3,658 members voted more
than 10 times, 1,156 voted more than 100 times and 54 members voted more than 1,000 times. The power law exponent
of users who received delegations during the observation period is 2.68 with median 64, showing an increased activity
and a more homogeneous distribution of activity. For controlling this result, we compare it with the exponent of users
who delegated their vote at least once to another user. Those
users who actively participated in the system have a power
law exponent of 2.21 for the number of voted issues at a median of 42 – delegates indeed have a increased activity also
when compared to active, delegating users.
To get an insight in the meaning of delegations, we examine the match of voting decisions between delegates and
their delegating voters before the delegation. The percentage of votes where both users gave identical ratings (positive/negative) to the same initiative is 0.61 whilst any two
random voters have an average match of 0.51. As this difference is quite small, we note that delegates do not seem
to receive delegations mainly because of shared political

User Approval Rates
In Fig. 2(b) we plot user approval rates, i.e. the percentage
of positive votes for each voter. We exclude users who voted
for less than 10 issues to ensure significance. The distribution exhibits a strong bias towards the approval of proposals and reaches the highest numbers at about 0.8 and 0.9.
This distribution closely resembles the overall approval of
users for initiatives. Surprisingly, there is a larger number of
“100%-users” (in total 160) who voted yes in all of the votes.
We found those users to receive a lower number of incoming
delegations (1.05 vs. 1.48 on average). One explanation for
this behaviour could be that some users only vote for initiatives they support and hope that other initiatives won’t reach
the quorum without their votes. We can approximate the distribution of user approval by a beta distribution which will
prove to be useful later for developing novel power indices.
Fig. 2(b) shows a fitted beta distribution as a dashed line.
We removed the 100%-users from the data before learning
the parameters to obtain a better fit (Minka 2000).
It seems very natural for a democratic voting system without coalitions or party discipline to have a biased distribution
of approval rates. As those systems typically include mechanisms to filter out proposals before they reach the voting
phase (to prevent an unworkable flood of voting) such as
requiring minimum support, the quality of the voted proposals already is relatively high. Due to selection processes, we
argue that most democratic online systems will exhibit a biased distribution of approval rates.

211

Approval Rate

1

← less than 30 voters

0.8
0.6
0.4

direct votes

0.2
0

direct and delegated votes
1

200

400

600
800
1000
Number of voted issues

1200

1400

Figure 3: Approval rate (Percentage of positive votes) of all voters for the kth voted issue as a function of k. Looking at direct
votes only, we see a decrease of approval rates from 0.8 to below 0.5 with higher voting experience, i.e. voters become more
critical. When including votes made by delegates on behalf of voters, we see only a slight decrease of approval rates and an
early stabilisation at about 0.7. Delegates therefore have a stabilising effect on approval rates. The number of observed votes
quickly gets smaller as the number of voted issues follows a power law. We marked the point where we observe less than 30
direct voters. The increased approval rate of direct votes around the 750th vote therefore indicates the existence of a very small
group of active voters with a high approval rate.
As the approval distribution is close to the 2/3 quorum
(which typically is required in votes), super voters are expected to have a bigger influence in the voting outcomes.
In order to gain insights in the temporal dynamics of approval rates, we plot the average approval rates for the kth
vote of all users in Fig. 3, illustrating the probability for seeing a positive vote in the first, second etc. vote of a user.
Clearly, more experienced users get more critical towards
proposals. The learning curve is observed for all users, independent of their activity as measured by the number of
voted issues – this e.g. can be seen in the approval rates for
users of different activity levels depicted in Fig. 4(a), which
decrease much slower than the learning curve. The negative
impact of the number of votes on the approval rate eventually would lead to a stagnation of the system, as the typical
quorum of 2/3 would be reached by hardly any initiative.

to vote positively and avoid giving a negative vote which
would inevitably lead to the failure of a proposal, given the
high voting weight. This social control would limit the exercised power of the super-voters and stabilise the voting
system, effectively preventing political stagnation.

Changes Over Time
Since LiquidFeedback is a novel system, its use is still in
an emerging stage, and therefore we expect its usage patterns to vary over time. Specifically, we look at the following
changes, by analysing the temporal evolution of networkbased statistics, shown in Fig. 5.
Changes in the distribution of delegations. While we
found the distribution of received delegations to be power
law-like, the inequality of this distribution is not constant,
as shown by several statistics in Fig. 5. In particular, we
computed the Gini coefficient of the delegation network’s
indegree distribution (Kunegis and Preusse 2012), and found
that its temporal behaviour is increasing, i.e., the inequality
of the number of received delegations increases over time.
This is consistent with a consolidation of the network, i.e.,
the emergence of super-voters and a stronger concentration
of power.

Impact of Delegations
Surprisingly, such a stagnation can not be observed in the
platform, even in periods when few new users join the system. We plot the effective votes of a user – i.e. all votes including delegated votes made on behalf of a user – in Fig. 3
and see that the negative development of approval rates is
compensated by delegated votes.
Do these findings imply that super-voters are more likely
to agree with initiatives? And do super-voters use their
power to turn voting results when voting in favour of initiatives, or do they agree with and vote according to the majority of voters? Fig. 4(b) shows the average approval and
agreement rate of voters for growing numbers of incoming
delegations. The agreement rate is given by the percentage
of votes which agree with the majority of voters excluding
delegations. We see a positive effect of incoming delegations
both on the approval rate and the agreement rate.
In contrast to the intuition that users tend to delegate their
votes to users who often vote in favour of proposals, we
found no significant differences in the approval rates of users
with many delegations in their voting history and normal
users. However, as soon as users get many incoming delegations, positive votes get more likely. We hypothesise that
voters with many incoming delegations feel social pressure

Changes in reciprocity. We measure the reciprocity of the
delegation behaviour as the ratio of delegation edges for
which a reciprocal delegation edge exists, to the total number of reciprocity edges, and observe that this value decrease
over time. This would indicate the the community is going
away from a set of small groups of voters that delegate to
each other, to a community in which most delegation edges
go to super-voters who do not delegate back. We must note
however that reciprocal delegations are only possible for delegations in different areas, as the set of delegations in a single area must not form cycles.
Changes in clustering. We measured the clustering coefficient, i.e., the probability that two neighbours of a voter
are themselves connected, within taking into account edge
directions (Watts and Strogatz 1998). This clustering coefficient is decreasing over the lifetime of the network while the
largest connected component (LCC) is growing, indicating

212

Agreement/Approval

0.4
0.2
0

1001-1100
1101-1200
1201-1300
1301-1400
1401-1500

0.6

1-100
101-200
201-300
301-400
401-500
501-600
601-700
701-800
801-900
901-1000

Approval Rate

1
0.8

Number of Voted Issues

(a)

Approval rate vs. activity

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

Agreement Rate
Approval Rate
20

40
60
Incoming Delegations

80

100

(b) Impact of delegations on approval/agreement rates

Figure 4: Voting behaviour. (a) Active users as measured by the count of voted issues tend to approve initiatives less often.
The effect is less pronounced than in Fig. 3. (b) Approval rate of votes for given weights. Surprisingly, super-voters tend to
approve more initiatives (approval rate), and tend to agree more often with the majority compared to normal users (agreement
rate). Delegations for authors of initiatives were ignored to rule out effects of implicit approval.
consider an issue with voters with delegation counts: 5, 4, 1,
given a quorum of 1/2. In this case the actual voting power
of the voters with delegation counts 4, 1 is equal, since they
have to agree on a position in order to have any impact at
all. We can measure power with theoretical indices and with
direct measures on the voting history.

again that the delegation network is slowly becoming less
like a friendship network, and more like a bipartite networks
of super-voters connected to normal voters.

Voting Power

Theoretical (Uniform) Power Indices
The political sciences literature knows several power indices
that measure the influence of individual voters in delegative
voting situations (Straffin 1994). The most common ones are
Shapley (Shapley 1954) and Banzhaf (Banzhaf 1965).
Those indices can be best described in terms of (simple
weighted) voting games. A voting game consists of a finite
set of voters i ∈ V together with weights wi ∈ 1, 2, . . . for
each voter and a quorum q. A subset of voters S ⊂ V is
called coalition. A coalition S is called
P winning if its total
weight is bigger than the quorum: i∈S wi ≥ q. A voter i
in a winning coalition S is called swing voter if the coalition
S − {i} is not winning.

2000
1000

Dlg. per user

0
8

Recipr.

Activity

With increasing number of incoming delegations the influence of a delegate increases. However, the influence on a
given issue can be very non-linear. As an extreme example

0.15

6
4

0.1

The Banzhaf power index The (unnormalised) Banzhaf
i|
power index of a voter i is defined as β̂i = 2|W
n−1 , where n is
the number of voters |V |, 2n−1 is the number of coalitions
that i is a part of and |Wi | denotes the number of winning
coalitions where i is a swing voter. The standard Banzhaf
index βi is the normalization of β̂i that makes all indices
add up to 1.

Gini

0.68
0.66

LCC

Clustering

0.64
0.15
0.1
0.05
3000

The Shapley power index The Shapley power index measures the number of orderings of all voters in V where the
voter i is “pivotal”. It is defined as:

2000
1000
0

2011

2012

2013

φi =

X
S, i swing for S

Figure 5: Changes in the delegation network. From top to
bottom, we show added and removed delegations, changes
in the per-user delegation count, inequality of incoming delegations measured by the Gini coefficient and the reciprocity
which gives the proportion of mutual delegations. Note that
mutual delegations are only permitted for distinct areas or
issues.

(|S| − 1)!(n − |S|)!
.
n!

(1)

Both indices can be characterised in probabilistic
terms (Straffin 1977). Indeed, assume that the vote of
a voter i is drawn randomly with probability pi for a “yes”
and 1 − pi for “no”. The individual effect of a voter i is
the probability of the voter i making a difference to the
outcome of the entire vote.

213

Of course, the individual effect will depend on the individual probabilities pi . Typical assumptions behind existing
theoretical power indices are:

less often than ordinary delegates. This explains the positive influence of delegations on the majority agreement observed in Fig. 4(b). The average ratio between theoretical
and user power is 0.34 – powerful users reverse the result of
a voting in only one of three votes. We find a small but significant negative correlation between power and exercised
power with ρ = −0.26 (p < 0.05).
In theory, power indices are supposed to correspond with
the potential power of users. To test this, we calculate the
Banzhaf and Shapley index for every vote and show the average predicted power in Fig. 6(b). On our data, both theoretical power indices fail to approximate the potential voting power. Instead, the Shapley index and the Banzhaf index
understate the potential power of users and predict a growth
rate that is lower than what we find.
We are not interested in predicting the exercised power,
as our main focus is on the prediction and recognition of
high potential power and the danger of power abuse. Though
potential power might not be used at a given time, there is
no reason to assume that this behaviour is stable.

• Uniformity. Each pi is chosen from a uniform distribution
on [0, 1].
• Independence. Each pi is chosen independently.
• Homogeneity. All pi are equal to p.
It was shown in (Straffin 1977) that the Banzhaf index
represents the individual effect of a voter under the assumption of independence and the Shapley index represents the
individual effect of a voter under the homogeneity assumption. Both indices rely on the uniformity assumption, and
most power indices from literature repeat this assumption
(Straffin 1977; 1994; Gelman, Katz, and Tuerlinckx 2002).

Empirical Power
Theoretical measures of power are based on simulation.
With the large number of observations available from the
LiquidFeedback dataset, we are able to directly measure
power as the ability of a voter to influence voting outcomes.

Non-Uniform Power Indices
The limited alignment of existing power indices with observed voting behaviour suggests that some of the fundamental assumptions behind those indices are not applicable for our data. Existing power indices are based on what
we call a uniformity assumption, i.e. that users vote with
equal probability in favour or against a proposal. Historically, there was no extensive voting data available to test this
assumption. For online platforms such as LiquidFeedback,
we have enough data to observe a voting bias (Kostakos
2009). Our findings on the distribution of voting results and
user approval rates shown in Fig. 2 allow us to overcome this
over-simplifying assumption of uniformity.
In this section, we propose generalisations of the Banzhaf
and Shapley power index which allow to model non-uniform
distributions of approval rates (as observed in our data).

Potential Power The ability to decide a vote is calculated
n
p
and negative Wm
with the sum of weights of positive Wm
votes in a voting m, testing if the weight wim of voter i is
bigger than the distance to quorum qm without i:
p
p
n
p
0
γim
= [wim > qm · (Wm
+ Wm
) − Wm
+ wim · vim
> 0]
{z
}
|
votes missing to reach quorum without voter i

(2)
0
where vim
∈ {0, 1} indicates the decision of voter i in votp
ing m and we use Iverson brackets so that γim
∈ {0, 1}.

Exercised Power Similarly, we can look at the actual vote
of voters and see whether the power actually was used to
reverse the voting result:
γie =

Beta index The user approval rate pi approximately follows a beta distribution. Under a beta distribution, this parameter is sampled from

0
p
p
 Wm

− wim · vim
Wm
> qm )
>
q
( p
)
=
6
(
m
p
n
n
Wm + Wm − wim
Wm + Wm
|
|
{z
}
{z
}
voting result without voter i

actual voting result

pi ∼

(3)
Looking at the voting history, the impact of delegates on
voting outcomes can be easily estimated by subtracting delegations from vote counts. Without the delegations, the vast
majority of 84,9% of the results remains unchanged – only
one in six voting outcomes is not identical to the outcome of
a hypothetical direct democratic system.
Does that mean that super-voters are not as powerful as
they were thought to be? To answer that question, we calculate the potential and the exercised power in Fig. 6(a) to
empirically measure the power of voters. We observe that
the ability to decide votes grows approximately linearly with
the voting weight. The exercised power measured as the percentage of reversed votes grows significantly slower than
the potential power – super-voters use their power relatively

1
pα−1 (1 − pi )β−1 .
B(α, β) i

(4)

For parameter estimation, we remove the extreme cases
of users with 100% approval and apply the maximumlikelihood estimate given by Minka (Minka 2000) to obtain
α = 3.00, β = 1.17. We display the probability density of
the beta distribution in Fig. 2(b);
We first define a generalisation of the Banzhaf index
based on the beta distributed pi , the beta power index. The
intuition behind this index is identical to the Banzhaf index:
the power of a voter corresponds to the fraction of coalition constellations in which the user is a swing voter. To create a non-uniform power index, we re-weight the permutation of possible coalitions by their probability under betadistributed pi for every voter. Every voter i ∈ V has an
assigned probability pi for approving a proposal and users

214

20

40
60
Delegations d

80

100

(a) Empirical Power

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Potential Power
Shapley Index
Banzhaf Index
p = 0.0046 d
p = 0.0038 d
p = 0.0032 d

20

Power p

Potential Power
Exercised Power
Power p

Power p

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

40
60
Delegations d

80

100

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

(b) Theoretical (Uniform) Power Indices

Pot. Power
Beta Index
Regr. Index
Beta2 Index
p = 0.0046 d
p = 0.0062 d
p = 0.0064 d
p = 0.0046 d

20

40
60
Delegations d

80

100

(c) Non-Uniform Power Indices

Figure 6: Measuring Power of super voters. (a) Average potential power and exercised power for a given number of delegations.
The exercised power grows significantly slower than the practical and theoretical power, indicating that super-voters tend to
agree with majority votes. (b) Average potential power and average predictions of uniform power indices for given delegation
counts. The uniform indices under -estimate the voting power in the LiquidFeedback data. (c) Averaged potential power and
average power index of the Beta, Regression and Beta2 power index for changing numbers of delegations. The Beta2 index
closely predicts the measured potential power.
are independent. For calculating the beta power index β 0 ,
we again calculate all possible coalitions S ⊂ V and weight
them by their probability


Z 1
Z 1 X Y
v

βi0 =
···
pj jS (1 − pj )1−vjS 
0

0

We again remove users with 100% approval rate from our
data and learn the regression parameters β0 = 0.7933 and
β1 = 0.0036. The regression predicts an approval probability pi of 0.69 at a weight of 1 and 0.76 at a weight of 100.
For obtaining the regression power index ρi , we weight
possible coalitions as the product of all approval rates predicted by logistic regression based on coalitions W where
voter i is a swing voter:
X Y v
ρi =
pj jS (1 − pj )1−vjS
(6)

S∈W j∈V

Y

Beta(pj | α, β) dp1 · · · dpV

(5)

j∈V

S∈W j∈V

where W denotes the set of winning coalitions in which i
is a swing voter and vjS is 1 if voter j ∈ V of coalition S
voted “yes” and 0 otherwise. The probability of a coalition is
given by a multinomial distribution with success probability
p~ = (p1 , ..., pV ), the beta distributed approval rates.
Beck (Beck 1975) noted that the probability of a tie is
very small under such a model – this finding is trivial and
indeed in the whole LiquidFeedback dataset only one initiative exhibits a tie. Gelman et al. claim that models based on
binomial distributions with p 6= 0.5 would not be useful because of the small standard deviation (Gelman, Katz, and
Tuerlinckx 2002). In our evaluation, we demonstrate that
this interpretation is wrong and give a natural explanation
by the generative process of the individual approval probability pi which is sampled from a beta distribution with a
possibly large variance.
It is evident that the beta index represents a generalisation
of the Banzhaf index – we can choose symmetric (i.e. equal)
beta parameters to retain the original index.

Beta2 index The assumption of independence made by
the Banzhaf index implies that voters have inhomogeneous
opinions and that there is frequent disagreement in votings,
i.e. there exist opposing factions within the party. In contrast, the Shapley index assumes that all voters share a similar opinion on a particular initiative and therefore agree with
it with the same probability pi = p, ∀i ∈ V . However, pi in
the Shapley index is sampled from a uniform distribution.
We modify the index by sampling p from the same beta
distribution employed for the beta index: p ∼ Beta(α, β)
with α = 3.00, β = 1.17. This index assumes that voters
share a homogeneous opinion on initiatives, and that there
is a positive voting bias to accept proposals. For the overall
calculation of the beta2 power index βi00 we sum over possible coalitions S ⊂ V , weighted by their probability:


Z 1 X Y

βi00 =
pvjS (1 − p)1−vjS  Beta(p | α, β) dp
0

Regression index Another observation besides biased
user approval rates is the impact of delegations on the approval rate shown in 4(b). To model this influence, a logistic regression can be trained to adapt the approval rates for
changing weights for an alternative power index. The regression function is given by
pi =

1
1 + e−(β0 +β1 x)

S∈W j∈V

(7)
where W again denotes the set of winning coalitions in
which i is a swing voter, vjS the approval of voter j ∈ V
in coalition S.

Evaluation
The potential power, measured in the same voting system
over thousands of votings for voters with changing vot-

.

215

ing weights, enables an objective evaluation of the predictive performance of power indices. We compare the
presented uniform power indices with the proposed nonuniform inidices by their predictive performance on the potential power of voters. To obtain the index values, we use
Monte-Carlo simulation, first randomly sampling approval
rates and subsequently sampling individual votes. We performed 1, 000, 000 runs for each voting. The evaluation was
run on a standard desktop computer.
Graphical evaluation. Fig. 6(c) compares the potential
power of voters with the prediction of the proposed nonuniform power indices. For every initiative in the voting
history, power indices are computed based on the voting
weights. The resulting indices then are averaged for each
voting weight. We observe that both the beta and the regression index over-estimate the power of users. The regression
index predicts values slightly higher than the beta index. In
contrast, the beta2 index predicts values very close to the
true potential power and closely resembles the gradient of
the measured power, giving a good assessment of the influence of super-voters.
Quantitative evaluation. For a quantitative comparison of
the power indices, we evaluate the prediction both on the
global and on the local level. On the global level, we try
to predict the average power of super-voters as in Fig. 6.
We measure the closeness of the prediction as the sum of
squared errors of the predicted theoretical power and the
measured potential power for voting weights wi ∈ [1, 100].
The results are shown in Table 2. The biggest deviations are
found for the regression, beta and Banzhaf index, indicating
that the independence assumption is violated in the voting
system. For the Shapley index, we get a significantly lower
value and the beta2 index provides the closest approximation.
On the local level, we make use of the extensive voting
history to compare the observed potential power of voters –
the ability to decide a vote – to the predicted power index
of every user. Following the probabilistic interpretation of
power indices (Straffin 1977), a power index corresponds
with the predicted probability of a voter having potential
power. We computed this probability for every voter in each
vote. Now, given the measured potential power of a voter,

we can calculate the log-likelihood of the observed power in
the voting history. Formally:
log L =

M X
X

p
log(p(γim
))

(8)

m=1 i∈Vn

where M is the number of initiatives, Vn is the set of voters
p
participating in the vote over initiative m and γim
indicates
the potential power of voter i in voting m.
The likelihood can then be used to calculate the perplexity, a common measure for the predictive quality of a probabilistic model. The perplexity is defined as
1

perplexity = 2− M

PM

i=1 log L

(9)

Following the perplexity scores, the beta2 index outperforms all other indices. The Shapley index yields the second
best result. The beta index is slightly better than the regression index and the Banzhaf index performs worst.

Discussion
The observed performance of the indices allows us to evaluate the assumptions behind these models. First, we note that
the indices based on the independence assumption of voters
perform significantly worse than the indices based on the
homogeneity assumption, implying that voters share a common opinion given by the approval rate of a vote. We found
that the integration of the observed positive influence of delegations on the approval rate by the regression index leads
to worse performance. The effect seems to be more complex
and has to be examined in future work. Modelling voters homogeneously – e.g. sampling the approval rate independent
of the voting weight – yields significantly better results.
Including observed voting bias in power indices leads to
an overall better predictive quality of both indices, measured
by lower perplexity. However, only for the homogeneous indices we observed a better global prediction. Independent
approval rates sampled from a uniform distribution better
approximate homogeneous voting behaviour than biased approval rates.
The proposed beta2 index, a biased generalisation of the
Shapley index, gives a precise prediction on the overall
power distribution in a voting system with delegations. We
can predict the ability of delegates to decide votes by sampling sets of voters and calculating the beta2 index. The beta
distribution parameters can be learned from voting history
or taken over from similar voting platforms. With those predictions, qualified statements about the distribution of power
in voting systems can be made and discussions objectified.
Both the analysis of voting behaviour and the empirical
measurement of potential and exercised power exhibit a responsible exercise of power by super-voters. We believe that
this is due to a responsible selection of delegates, the social
control in an enforced public voting and the risk of the immediate loss of voting power by recall of delegations.

Table 2: Performance of power indices. Perplexity and
squared prediction error for the uniform power indices by
Banzhaf and Shapley and the non-uniform power indices
presented in this paper, evaluated on the complete voting history of the LiquidFeedback system. Lower perplexity values
indicate a better model fit. The Beta2 index proposed earlier
outperforms existing and other competing power indices.
Model
Squared Error Perplexity
Shapley(Shapley 1954)
0.903
78.6
Banzhaf(Banzhaf 1965)
1.320
297.9
Beta power index
2.220
227.8
Regression power index
2.266
232.0
Beta2 power index
0.627
76.6

Conclusions
Platforms for online delegative democracy are likely to gain
relevance for political movements and parties in the future. Understanding the voting behaviour and emergence of

216

Kohno, T.; Stubblefield, A.; Rubin, A. D.; and Wallach, D. S.
2004. Analysis of an electronic voting system. In Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE.
Kostakos, V. 2009. Is the crowd’s wisdom biased? A quantitative analysis of three online communities. In Proc. Int.
Conf. on Computational Science and Engineering, 251–255.
Kunegis, J., and Preusse, J. 2012. Fairness on the web:
Alternatives to the power law. In Proc. Web Science Conf.
Leskovec, J.; Huttenlocher, D.; and Kleinberg, J. 2010. Governance in social media: A case study of the Wikipedia promotion process. In Int. Conf. on Weblogs and Social Media.
Lietz, H.; Wagner, C.; Bleier, A.; and Strohmaier, M. 2014.
When politicians talk: Assessing online conversational practices of political parties on twitter. In International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM2014),
Ann Arbor, MI, USA, June 2-4.
Loewenstein, G. 1999. Experimental economics from the
vantage-point of behavioural economics. The Economic J.
109(453):25–34.
Miegel, F., and Olsson, T. 2008. From pirates to politicians.
Democracy, journalism and technology: New developments
in an enlarged Europe 203–16.
Minka, T. 2000. Estimating a Dirichlet distribution. TR.
Muchnik, L.; Aral, S.; and Taylor, S. J. 2013. Social influence bias: A randomized experiment. Science
341(6146):647–651.
Packel, E. W., and Deegan Jr, J. 1980. An axiomated family
of power indices for simple n-person games. Public Choice
35(2):229–239.
Paulin, A. 2014. Through liquid democracy to sustainable non-bureaucratic government. In Proc. Int. Conf. for
E-Democracy and Open Government, 205–217.
Robertson, S. P.; Wania, C. E.; and Park, S. J. 2007. An
observational study of voters on the internet. In HICSS, 90.
IEEE Computer Society.
Shapley, L. 1954. A method for evaluating the distribution of power in a committee situation. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev.
48:787–792.
Straffin, P. D. 1977. Homogenity, independence and power
indices. Public Choice 30:107–118.
Straffin, P. D. 1994. Power and stability in politics. Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications 2.
Tenorio-Fornés, A., and Hassan, S. 2014. Towards an agentsupported online assembly. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Advanced
Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications, 72–77.
Watkins, J. H., and Rodriguez, M. A. 2008. A survey of
web-based collective decision making systems. In Evolution
of the Web in Artificial Intelligence Environments. Springer.
Watts, D. J., and Strogatz, S. H. 1998. Collective dynamics
of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature 393(1):440–442.
Yamakawa, H.; Yoshida, M.; and Tsuchiya, M. 2007. Toward delegated democracy: Vote by yourself, or trust your
network. Int. J. of Human and Social Sciences 1(2).

power in such movements represents an important but open
scientific and pressing practical challenge. In this paper we
have studied (i) how people vote in online delegative democracy platforms such as LiquidFeedback, and how they delegate votes to what we call super-voters. This has motivated
us to (ii) better understand the power they have over voting
processes. In particular, we explored (iii) the theoretical, potential as well as the exercised power of super voters in online delegative democracy platforms. Towards that end, we
employed the Banzhaf and Shapley power index but found
conflicts between the assumption of uniformity of voting behaviour made by both indices and the observed voting bias.
We have thus introduced and evaluated a new class of power
indices that (a) generalises previous work based on beta distributed voter approval and (b) achieves significantly better
predictions of potential voting power in our evaluation. To
the best of our knowledge, our evaluation based on a large
voting history represents an innovative objective evaluation
of power indices.
Our work illuminates the potential of online delegative
democracy platforms and sheds light on the power of supervoters in such systems. While we find that the theoretical and
potential power of super-voters is indeed high, we also observe that they stabilise the voting system and prevent stagnation while they use their power wisely. Super-voters do not
fully act on their power to change the outcome of votes, and
they vote in favour of proposals with the majority of voters
in many cases. This suggests that potential limitations of online delegative democracy platforms (such as the domination
of super-voters over regular voters) can be – and indeed are
– alleviated by the behaviour of super voters in such systems
to a certain extent.
Acknowledgments We thank Claudia Wagner and Lena
Hegerfeld for their early contribution of ideas to this paper.
This work was supported by the research network Communication, Media and Politics (KoMePol) at the University
Koblenz–Landau.

References
Banzhaf, J. 1965. Wheighted voting does not work: a mathematical analysis. Rutgers Law Review 19:317–343.
Beck, N. 1975. A note on the probability of a tied election.
Public Choice 23(1):75–79.
Deegan Jr, J., and Packel, E. W. 1978. A new index of power
for simplen-person games. Int. J. of Game Theory 7(2).
Dodgson, C. L. 1884. The principles of parliamentary representation. Harrison and Sons.
Fredriksson, M. 2013. An open source project for politics.
In Arvanitakis, J., and Matthews, I., eds., The Citizen in the
21st Century. Inter-Disciplinary Press.
Gelman, A.; Katz, J.; and Tuerlinckx, F. 2002. The mathematics and statistics of voting power. Statistical Science
17(4):420–435.
Jabbusch, S. 2011. Liquid democracy in der piratenpartei.
Master’s thesis, University of Greifswald.

217

