AEA Papers and Proceedings 2018, 108: 33–37
https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20181002

Quadratic Voting: How Mechanism Design
Can Radicalize Democracy†
By Steven P. Lalley and E. Glen Weyl*
Vickrey (1961) launched mechanism design
as a project to implement Lerner’s (1944)
“socialist” dreams of welfare optimality absent
a benevolent and omniscient planner. When
Vickrey became a Nobel Laureate, he announced
that he planned to bring this vision to the broader
public using the “bully pulpit” the prize afforded
him, but he sadly died days later. Furthermore,
while Vickrey’s ambitions gained some early
adherents (Tideman and Tullock 1976), experience (Ausubel and Milgrom 2005; Rothkopf
2007) and Vickrey’s own warnings suggested
his exact scheme was usually impractical.
Thus, while mechanism design transformed
economic theory, the novel mechanisms it suggests have largely been treated as a series of
insightful theoretical curiosities of little practical relevance or applied in quite narrow settings,
for example to spectrum and internet advertising
auctions (Milgrom 2004; Edelman, Ostrovsky,
and Schwarz 2007). In a book that will come out
as this article does (Posner and Weyl forthcoming), one of us aims to revive the more radical
ambitions of mechanism design and suggest
they may offer a solution to the economic, political, and social crisis of our times.
Perhaps the most glaring element of that crisis
has been the struggles of democracies to resolve
majority-minority conflicts and the resulting
ascendancy of “populist” tyrannies of the majority or plurality. This oldest and most persistent
problem of democracy seems particularly to

lend itself to Vickrey’s approach both because of
its sweeping scope and because the basic problem seems to be precisely the lack of markets.
One-person-one-vote (1p1v) rations a single
unit of influence on any collective decision to each
voter, preventing potential Pareto-improving
trade. When we complain about the failure of
standard democracy to account for intensity of
preference or knowledge (Hirschman 1982), we
mean that it blocks trades where some citizens
would be willing to give up their influence on
some issues to gain more influence on others.
Furthermore, given that the standard market system of exchange may be derived as a limit of
Vickrey’s procedure in a large society (Tideman
and Plassmann 2017), it seems natural that
applying a similar logic to public goods could
yield a solution.
Yet, to our knowledge, prior to our work on
the subject no simple and flexible pricing system for collective decisions that could apply to
common settings such as binary decisions had
been proposed.1 Groves and Ledyard (1977)
and Hylland and Zeckhauser (1980) suggested
closely related market systems for choosing continuous public goods, but groups of voters rarely
directly choose continuous public goods. Here
we propose a simple version of Hylland and
Zeckhauser’s scheme for the common setting of
communities making repeated binary collective
decisions. As with the market system for private
goods, it is the large population limit (this time
for public goods) of Vickrey’s scheme and we
will show that it is the unique way to price votes
that achieves optimality in a “price-taking”
model analogous to the conditions under which
markets achieve optimality.

* Lalley: Department of Statistics, University of
Chicago, 5747 S. Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 (email:
lalley@galton.uchicago.edu); Weyl: Microsoft Research,
One Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02142, and Yale
University, Department of Economics and Law School
(email: glenweyl@microsoft.com). This is the final of many
versions of a paper, to which countless colleagues have contributed. They all have our gratitude, but errors are our own.
†
Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20181002 to visit
the article page for additional materials and author disclosure statement(s).

1
Slightly after the first draft of this paper circulated,
Goeree and Zhang (2017) proposed a closely related mechanism, though one applicable only in a narrower scope.

33

34

MAY 2018

AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

I. Price-Theoretic Model

Consider a society of ​N​voters ​i = 1, … , N​
where many binary collective decisions (e.g.,
referenda or choice of leaders) arise. To create
the opportunity for market trade, each voter is
endowed with a large stock of “voice credits”
that they may spend influencing the outcome of
these decisions. As is common in the analysis
of markets for private goods (Willig 1976), we
assume there are enough issues and that each is
sufficiently inconsequential that every voter has
a quasi-linear “continuation value” for retaining
voice credits for future votes. As in the theory
of fair resource allocation (Varian 1974), we
assume that voice credits have been distributed
in a manner (such as equal division) considered
fair by the relevant society in the sense that maximizing total equivalent continuation value in
units of voice credits defines social optimality.
Consider some particular decision. Call the
value that voters would receive, in units of voice
credits, for seeing alternative ​
A​prevail over
alternative ​B​ ​2​ui​​​​ , with negative values indicating
a preference for ​B​over A
​ ​. The community votes
to determine which alternative is implemented,
with each voter choosing a continuous number of
votes ​​vi​​​​either positive or negative depending on
which alternative she favors. ​A​is implemented
just when ​​∑ i​ ​​ ​vi​​​  ≥ 0​. Each voter pays a cost
​c​(​vi​​​)​​voice credits for her votes where ​c​is differentiable, convex, even, and strictly increasing
in ​​  ​vi​ ​​ ​​to a central clearing house. We describe ​c​
as a vote pricing rule.
A game-theoretic analysis would specify
beliefs of each voter about the distribution of
values and derive an equilibrium strategy. We
conduct such an analysis, which involves narrow assumptions about beliefs and behavior and
statistical subtleties, elsewhere (Lalley and Weyl
2017). We focus here instead on a price-taking
approximation (Weyl forthcoming) that appears
to be valid more broadly (Weyl 2017) and shows
simply the core logic.
We thus assume that each voter, in deciding how many votes to purchase, weighs the
marginal cost of an additional vote against the
perceived chance the vote will be pivotal in
swinging the election. The price-taking assumption we adopt, originally proposed by Mueller
(1973) and Laine (1977), is that all voters agree
on this marginal pivotality of votes p​ ​on this
issue (though of course they may differ across

| |

issues). Under this assumption, a rational voter
will choose ​​v​i​​​ to maximize ​2​u​i​​  p​vi​​​  − c​(​vi​​​)​​. By
our assumption that vote credits are distributed
fairly, society wishes to implement A
​ ​ exactly
when ​​∑ i​ ​​ ​u​i​​  ≥ 0​. We say a vote pricing rule is
robustly optimal if, for every p​ > 0​  , ​N​, and vector ​u​ , each price-taking voter i​​chooses votes
​​v​ i⁎​  ​​ so that ∑
​​ i​ ​​ ​v​ i⁎​  ​​has the same sign as ∑
​​ i​ ​​ ​ui​​​​.
II. Uniqueness

Our main result is that the set of robustly optimal vote pricing rules are precisely the set of
quadratic rules.
THEOREM 1: A vote pricing rule is robustly
optimal if and only if it is quadratic.
PROOF:
See our online Appendix.
The central idea of the omitted formal proof
is that quadratic functions are the only ones
with linear derivatives and thus the only functions where a voter buying votes equates her
marginal benefit and cost at a number of votes
proportional to her value. Consider the class of
vote pricing rules c​(x) = ​x​​  a​​ for ​a > 1​. The
first-order condition for voter optimization is,
by differentiation,
	​2p​ui​​​  = a ​​(​vi​​​)​​​  a−1​   ⇒​
( i) ( a )

2p
	​​v​​​  = sign​​u​​​ ​ ​​ _
​  ​ ​​​ 
i

_
​  1  ​

a−1

| |

1
_

​ ​​ ​  u​i​​  ​​​  ​  a−1 ​​  .​

If ​a = 2​this leads to ​​v​ i⁎​  ​​ proportional to ​​ui​​​​ and
thus robust optimality. For any other a​ ​  , ​​v​ i⁎​  ​​ is not
proportional to ​​u​i​​​and thus the costly voting rule
will be suboptimal for some arrangements of
values and ​p​.
In contrast, consider the extremes of ​a → 1​
(as voting cost approaches linear) and ​a → ∞​
(as voting cost becomes very convex). In the
former case, the power on u​
​​i​​​ determining ​​v​ i⁎​  ​​
becomes infinite and thus voters with only
slightly greater values will vote infinitely more.
Linear voting thus leads to dictatorship of the
most intense voter, as in Casella, LlorenteSaguer, and Palfrey (2012). This reflects the
common intuition against vote trading: allowing
it will lead to capture by the most intense special
interests.

VOL. 108

QUADRATIC VOTING: HOW MECHANISM DESIGN CAN RADICALIZE DEMOCRACY

In the case of a​ → ∞​ 
, the power on u​
​​i​​​
approaches ​0​so all voters buy exactly one vote
in the direction of their preference as in 1p1v. In
this sense, QV is an optimal intermediate point
between the extremes of dictatorship and majority rule. It is the one vote pricing rule under
which voters who intend only their own gain are
led, as if by an invisible hand, to advance the
interests of society. We refer to voting based on a
quadratic pricing rule as Quadratic Voting (QV)
for obvious reasons.
III. Practical Promise

While price-taking is a useful heuristic, it is
unlikely to literally hold in game theoretic models of voter behavior. In other work, we have
considered a variety of these models. In Lalley
and Weyl (2017) we analyze the most canonical case from the game theoretic literature, in
which voters’ values are drawn independently
and identically from a known value distribution
and act as rational, risk-neutral expected utility
maximizers. We show that under appropriate
conditions and in all symmetric Bayes-Nash
equilibria in large populations the price-taking
assumption approximately holds for almost all
voters and, thus, that the welfare losses from QV
decay generically at a rate _
​​ 1 ​​as the population
N
grows. In another parallel to markets, this is the
same rate of convergence of private goods markets toward efficiency as competition grows.
The structure of game theoretic equilibrium
is quite subtle and thus our rigorous mathematical proof of this result is long and technical. However, taking the approximations that
we rigorously prove hold in this case to hold,
appropriately adjusted, in other cases and
using numerical methods allows analysis of
QV for other environments. In Chandar and
Weyl (2017) one of us, with another coauthor,
considers the baseline model in smaller populations for a range of distributions numerically
and finds that the welfare lost from QV relative
to the optimum is very small (rarely more than
a few percentage points) while that lost under
1p1v may easily be near 100 percent.
In Weyl (2017) one of us uses these approximations to allow for collusion, uncertainty about
the value distribution, and the possibility that
voters are not perfectly rational and consequentialist. In some of these settings QV performs

35

better than in our baseline and it rarely has more
than a very small welfare loss, again in contrast
to 1p1v. Furthermore, laboratory experiments
on QV (Goeree and Zhang 2017; Cárdenas,
Mantilla, and Zárate 2014) are largely consistent
with these robustness conclusions. While participants do not play precisely as game theoretic
equilibrium would predict, votes are generally
linearly proportional to values with some noise,
leading to outcomes much closer to optimal than
1p1v.
Each of these results has important limitations on its own; some are in stylized, or specific experimental, settings, while others are
approximate or numerical. Together, however,
we believe they suggest significant promise as
they illustrate the robustness of this simple yet
(approximately) optimal voting rule. This contrasts with other voting rules which are either
optimal, but widely seen as too fragile to apply
in practice, or which do not aim at optimality.
In the first category, the most famous proposal
was Vickrey’s original scheme as refined by
Clarke (1971) and Groves (1973), the first fully
optimal mechanism. However, this approach is
extremely sensitive to collusion by even a very
small group (Ausubel and Milgrom 2005). It
also requires large and highly uncertain expenditures of money that make it heavily dependent
on using real money rather than voice credits
(Greenberg, Mackay, and Tideman 1977), a possibility that may be unjust given the inequality
of wealth in most societies (Laurence and Sher
2017; Ober 2017). As noted in our introduction,
to address these problems, Groves and Ledyard
(1977) and Hylland and Zeckhauser (1980)
proposed a mechanism closely related to QV,
but only applicable to continuous public goods
problems, which rarely arise in practical applications. Other optimal mechanisms proposed in
the literature are even less robust (Weyl 2017).
Given this, practical attention has primarily
focused on mechanisms that do not aspire to even
approximate optimality, such as ones that do not
allow expression of preference intensity (Brams
and Fishburn 1978) or are like QV but with a
linear costly voting function (Casella 2005;
Hortala-Vallve 2012) and thus induce dictatorship of the most intense voters.
QV aims to combine the simplicity and practicality of this latter group of designs with an
approximation to the optimality of the first. This
has allowed applications to polling and survey

36

MAY 2018

AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

research (Quarfoot et al. 2017; Holland 2017),
where evidence from initial studies shows significant improvements over existing methods of
preference elicitation. Higher-stakes applications
to politics (Posner and Weyl 2015) or corporate
governance (Posner and Weyl 2014) remain far
more speculative and are not advisable without
further experimentation at smaller scales.
IV. Radical Democracy, Radical Markets

However, cautious but increasingly ambitious experimentation seems warranted given
the potential of QV to create a truly radical democracy in several senses. First, and
most mechanically, QV may also be viewed
as individuals receiving votes equal to the
square root or radical of the voice credits they
spend. Second, QV gets to the roots of what
the framers of modern democratic institutions,
such as Alexander Hamilton, the Marquis de
Condorcet, and Jeremy Bentham, viewed as
the aim of democracy: to ensure the state serves
the general happiness of the people maximally.
Third, QV radically expands the rights of citizens to fully and freely express their political
views, liberating them from the straightjacket
of 1p1v influence rationing. In this sense, it
shows how mechanism design can suggest
fundamental and yet also practical reforms of
social institutions.
Yet Vickrey’s vision has nearly as much to
give to markets for private as public goods. A
follower of Henry George, Vickrey was skeptical of private property and the central argument
of his 1961 classic was that auctioning assets
ensured their efficient allocation. On the other
hand, Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) show
allocative efficiency is impossible beginning
from private ownership. One can imagine many
assets (other than personal property) being
continuously auctioned for rental according
to Vickrey’s favored English auction, much as
occurs with internet advertising slots. However,
rather than the revenue being appropriated by a
web platform, it could be returned to the public in equal shares as a social dividend, much as
envisioned by George. Such a Vickrey Commons
would on the one hand take the logic of the free
market to its furthest extreme, while on the other
hand abolish private property and most inequality. It is the natural private goods markets analog
of the radical market logic of QV.

As with the direct application of Vickrey’s
schemes to collective decisions, a Vickrey
Commons would face a host of practical challenges and variations on it, such as that proposed
by Weyl and Zhang (2017), are of greater practical relevance. Yet as a thought experiment it,
along with QV, illustrates the potential to break
the deadlocked ideologies of left and right that
plague our society. For mechanism designers to
realize this potential, they will have to broaden
their horizons beyond both narrow applications
and impractical theory, to learn to be at once idealistic and pragmatic, to deploy rigor flexibly,
and to account for sociological, psychological,
legal, and other factors that they have traditionally shied away from given their analytical
intractability. Here we tried to illustrate briefly
the challenges and promise of such an approach.
REFERENCES
Ausubel, Lawrence M., and Paul Milgrom. 2005.

“The Lovely but Lonely Vickrey Auction.”
In Combinatorial Auctions, edited by Peter
Cramton, Yoav Shoham, and Richard Steinberg, 17–40. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brams, Steven J., and Peter C. Fishburn. 1978.
“Approval Voting.” American Political Science
Review 72 (3): 831–47.
Cárdenas, Juan Camilo, César Mantilla, and
Román David Zárate. 2014. “Purchasing Votes

without Cash: Implementing Quadratic Voting Outside the Lab.” https://www.aeaweb.
org/aea/2015conference/program/retrieve.
php?pdfid=719.
Casella, Alessandra. 2005. “Storable Votes.”
Games and Economic Behavior 51 (2): 391–
419.
Casella, Alessandra, Aniol Llorente-Saguer, and
Thomas R. Palfrey. 2012. “Competitive Equi-

librium in Markets for Votes.” Journal of Political Economy 120 (4): 593–658.
Chandar, Bharat K., and E. Glen Weyl. 2017.
“Quadratic Voting in Finite Populations.”
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2571026.
Clarke, Edward H. 1971. “Multipart Pricing of
Public Goods.” Public Choice 11 (1): 17–33.
Edelman, Benjamin, Michael Ostrovsky, and
Michael Schwarz. 2007. “Internet Adver-

tising and the Generalized Second-Price
­Auction: Selling Billions of Dollars Worth of
­Keywords.” American Economic Review 97
(1): 242–59.

VOL. 108

QUADRATIC VOTING: HOW MECHANISM DESIGN CAN RADICALIZE DEMOCRACY

Goeree, Jacob K., and Jingjing Zhang. 2017. “One

Man, One Bid.” Games and Economic Behavior 101: 151–171.

Greenberg, Joseph, Robert Mackay, and Nicolaus Tideman. 1977. “Some Limitations of the

Groves-Ledyard Optimal Mechanism.” Public
Choice 29 (2S): 129–37.
Groves, Theodore. 1973. “Incentives in Teams.”
Econometrica 41 (4): 617–31.
Groves, Theodore, and John Ledyard. 1977.
“Optimal Allocation of Public Goods: A Solution to the ‘Free Rider’ Problem.” Econometrica 45 (4): 783–810.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1982. Shifting Involvements: Private Interests and Public Action.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Holland, Alisha C. 2017. “Square Miles: The Spatial Politics of Mass Infrastructure.” Unpublished.
Hortala-Vallve, Rafael. 2012. “Qualitative Voting.” Journal of Theoretical Politics 24 (4):
526–54.
Hylland, Aanund, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1980.
“A Mechanism for Selecting Public Goods
when Preferences must be Elicited.” Unpublished.
Laine, Charles R. 1977. “Strategy in Point Voting: A Note.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
91 (3): 505–07.
Lalley, Steven P., and E. Glen Weyl. 2017. “Nash
Equilibria for Quadratic Voting.” https://arxiv.
org/abs/1409.0264.
Laurence, Ben, and Itai Sher. 2017. “Ethical
Considerations on Quadratic Voting.” Public
Choice 172 (1-2): 195–222.
Lerner, Abba P. 1944. The Economics of Control:
Principles of Welfare Economics. New York:
MacMillan.
Milgrom, Paul. 2004. Putting Auction Theory to
Work. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Mueller, Dennis C. 1973. “Constitutional Democracy and Social Welfare.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 87 (1): 60–80.
Myerson, Roger B., and Mark A. Satterthwaite.

1983. “Efficient Mechanisms for Bilateral
Trading.” Journal of Economic Theory 29 (2):
265–81.

37

Ober, Josiah. 2017. “Equality, Legitimacy, Inter-

ests, and Preferences: Historical Notes on
­Quadratic Voting in a Political Context.” Public Choice 172 (1-2): 223–32.
Posner, Eric A., and E. Glen Weyl. 2014. “Quadratic Voting as Efficient Corporate Governance.” University of Chicago Law Review 81
(1): 251–72.
Posner, Eric A., and E. Glen Weyl. 2015. “Voting
Squared: Quadratic Voting in Democratic Politics.” Vanderbilt Law Review 68 (2): 441–500.
Posner, Eric A., and E. Glen Weyl.Forthcoming.
Radical Markets: Uprooting Capitalism and
Democracy for a Just Society. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Quarfoot, David, Douglas von Kohorn, Kevin
Slavin, Rory Sutherland, David Goldstein, and
Ellen Konar. 2017. “Quadratic Voting in the

Wild: Real People, Real Votes.” Public Choice
172 (1-2): 283–303.
Rothkopf, Michael H. 2007. “Thirteen Reasons
Why the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves Process is
Not Practical.” Operations Research 55 (2):
191–97.
Tideman, Nicolaus, and Florenz Plassmann. 2017.
“Efficient Bilateral Taxation of Externalities.”
Public Choice (1-2): 109–30.
Tideman, T. Nicolaus, and Gordon Tullock. 1976.
“A New and Superior Process for Making
Social Choices.” Journal of Political Economy
84 (6): 1145–1159.
Varian, Hal R. 1974. “Equity, Envy, and Efficiency.” Journal of Economic Theory 9 (1):
63–91.
Vickrey, William. 1961. “Counterspeculation,
Auctions, and Competitive Sealed Tenders.”
Journal of Finance 16 (1): 8–37.
Weyl, E. Glen. Forthcoming. “Price Theory.”
Journal of Economic Literature.
Weyl, E. Glen. 2017. “The Robustness of Quadratic Voting.” Public Choice 172 (1-2):
75–107.
Weyl, E. Glen, and Anthony Lee Zhang. 2017.
“Depreciating Licenses.” https://ssrn.com/
abstract=2744810.
Willig, Robert D. 1976. “Consumer’s Surplus Without Apology.” American Economic
Review 66 (4): 589–97.

