Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 9, Number 1—Winter 1995—Pages 3–26

An Introduction
to Vote-Counting Schemes
Jonathan Levin and Barry Nalebuff

T

he design of an electoral system is fundamental to any democracy.
Motivation for understanding how electoral system design matters
comes from many directions: the creation of new constitutions in
eastern Europe; the recent trauma of a three-way presidential election in the
United States; the ongoing debate over U.S. redistricting and gerrymandering;
the furor caused by Lani Guinier's call for a more representative voting system.
The status quo adds another incentive. Plurality rule is pervasive even though
it is a flawed system. Fortunately, there is no lack of suitable alternatives. One of
the purposes of this symposium—and this paper in particular—is to help
illustrate and motivate the remarkable variety of alternative mechanisms that
aggregate individual preferences to decide an election. This overview offers a
summary of sixteen distinct methods and demonstrates by example how some
of the more complex systems work. The shorter papers that follow focus on
some of the more popular alternatives, including approval voting, single transferable vote, the maximum likelihood rule, and more.
One can speculate on why alternatives to plurality rule have had such a
difficult time being adopted. Part of the cause may be Arrow's general possibility theorem. Arrow (1951) demonstrates that any voting system applied to an
unrestricted collection of voter preferences must have some serious defect; we
must always choose between flawed alternatives. With conflicting theoretical
guidance to help select the least-flawed option, people evaluate a system by its
likely effect on the status quo outcome. Since those in power tend to want to
• Jonathan Levin is an M. Phil. candidate at Nuffield College, Oxford University,
Oxford, Great Britain. Barry Nalebuff is Professor of Economics, School of Management, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.

4

Journal of Economic Perspectives

preserve the status quo—the status quo electoral system is what brought them
into power—we should not be surprised by the difficulty of implementing
electoral reform.
An electoral system has to balance multiple objectives: establishing legitimacy, encouraging participation, discouraging factionalization. We focus on the
goal of representativeness. How do we go about choosing a representative
outcome? What is meant by representation?1 Should we examine the position
of the elected representatives or the position of the policies that they pass? How
do we trade off these objectives? We do not believe that there is any one right
answer (although there are certainly many wrong ones).
The point of this paper is to move away from theoretical discussions of
various properties; our aim is to provide the motivation behind different
counting schemes. Are they better suited for choosing a single winner or for
ranking the candidates? Do they tend to favor candidates with loyal minorities
or candidates who are acceptable to all and the favorite of none? Are they
simple enough to be used for a general political election where voters may only
be familiar with one or two candidates, or are they more applicable in a board
of directors situation where each voter possesses more detailed information?
We try to give some examples of how and why they work and where they fail.
We have also taken several of the methods and applied them to voting data
gathered from British Union elections (data collected separately by N. Tideman
and I. D. Hill). An interesting feature of these British elections is that voters are
required to rank the candidates. As a result, knowing the voter ranking, we can
simulate elections under a variety of electoral systems. It is perhaps remarkable
that among the 30 elections we examined, with the exception of plurality rule
and single transferable vote, none of the other seven alternatives considered
gave a different top choice (see later section). The systems differed in the
rankings of the lower candidates. This empirical regularity suggests a connection to some recent theoretical work (Caplin and Nalebuff, 1988, 1991): when
voter preferences are sufficiently similar, a variety of voting systems lead to
similar choices, and these choices have desirable properties. The difficulties in
aggregating preferences arise in the case of a population with a lack of a
consensus; this is the situation where the choice of electoral system can make
the greatest difference and where apparently minor differences can directly
influence the outcome.
The next section of our paper describes the basic information on which
most vote-counting schemes rely: voter rankings and paired comparisons. We
then describe five voting rules scored directly from the voter rankings, six
paired-comparisons rules, and two additional rules derived from sports rankings. An Appendix then offers a few additional rules. We then attempt to point
1

To give just the most simple example, if the population is uniformly distributed between positions
0 and 1, and we are to choose three representatives, should they be equally spaced [0.25, 0.5, and
0.75], or should they be selected so as to minimize the average distance traveled to the nearest
legislator [0.16, 0.5, and 0.83]?

Jonathan Levin and Barry Nalebuff 5

out how differences between rules might affect candidates' strategies and the
outcome of a real election. In the final section, we address different factors that
distinguish the methods and attempt to provide a basis to choose between
methods. In our description of the various vote-counting rules, we have
benefited greatly from the excellent surveys done by Lowell Anderson (1990,
1994) and Nicolaus Tideman (1993).

Voter Rankings and Paired Comparisons
Before describing the various counting rules, we need to consider their
general structure and the information they rely on. Even if we actually had
knowledge of all the voters' utility functions, there is the quandary of trying to
make interpersonal comparisons of utility. This leads us to take as data a voter's
ordinal ranking of the various candidates. However, there is a fundamental
problem of getting people to reveal their true preferences accurately, since all
voting systems encourage strategizing. Even if we had truthful rankings, there
remains the issue of how to take averages over these rankings. Our focus is on
this last step. Most of the variety in electoral schemes comes from the choice of
different metrics for measuring the distance between one ranking and another.
From the start we should note that in a multi-candidate election, simple
plurality rule throws away too much data. The voter's first choice is a poor
summary statistic of preferences. Information regarding second and later
choices is valuable in helping aggregate preferences. At the other extreme, we
cannot reasonably ask people to vote in all possible pairwise elections. Even if
there were only seven dwarfs running in a primary, this would require a voter
to make 21 choices. Fortunately, we can easily infer pairwise preferences from
ordinal voter rankings. For example, if a voter ranks the candidates a > b > c,
we infer that a is preferable to b and c and that b is preferable to c. (Of course,
making these inferred rankings imposes a consistency condition that voters
might not obey, as discussed in Amartya Sen's companion paper.) With one
exception (approval voting), all the methods we discuss use as their base data
the voter's ranking of the individual candidates. In general, these rankings
provide more information than we need to tally the election. For our purposes,
we assume that voters rank all the candidates on their ballots, and do not score
candidates as tied.2
2
Many theorists have addressed the issue of how to deal with voters who either fail to rank some
candidates, or rank two or more candidates as tied. Because of the immediate complications these
issues generate, we try to avoid raising them in the general discussion. In a paired comparisons
approach, there are basically two options when a voter ranks two or more candidates as tied. When
we compare the candidates head-to-head, we can either ignore that voter, or give each candidate
1/2 point. If we do not count the voter, some head-to-head matches will have fewer total points
than others. Since this leads to problems later, we could normalize all head-to-head scores so that a
candidate's score is the percentage of the electorate won against the opponent. This method differs

6

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Voting theorists from the Marquis de Condorcet to Kenneth Arrow have
shared the conviction that we should judge candidates on the basis of their
pairwise performance. A candidate who wins every head-to-head matchup is
called a Condorcet winner, in honor of Condorcet's Essay on the Application of
Mathematics to the Theory of Decision-Making (1785). A Condorcet winner will win

an election under most of the rules we describe below (although in some
instances a good argument exists for not choosing the Condorcet winner, as
Peyton Young explains in this issue). Most of the difficult issues in vote
counting arise when no Condorcet winner exists; instead there is a voting cycle,
i.e., three candidates a, b, c such that a beats b, b beats c, and c beats a.3 Each
method treats cycles differently, leading to discrepancies in how they rank the
candidates.
Once we translate the voter rankings into paired comparisons, we often
organize the information into a "paired-comparisons matrix." In this matrix,
the ijth entry is the number of votes for i over j. The entries on the diagonal
are all 0. Writing down this matrix actually loses information contained on
individual ballots. That is, the matrix might show that candidate i received 45
votes over j, but it does not reveal whether those voters placed i first on their
ballots and j last, or i sixth and j seventh. We may make an informed guess,
but we cannot recover individual rankings from the paired-comparisons
matrix.
Some voting rules further distill this information by only distinguishing the
winner of each head-to-head comparison. They utilize a "win-loss matrix,"
where the ijth entry is 1 if more voters prefer candidate i to j and – 1 if more
voters prefer j to i. If there is a tie between candidates i and j, we enter a 0.
Once again, all entries on the diagonal are 0 by definition.
The first five voting rules discussed are categorized as "rank-scoring" rules
because they score directly from the rankings. The following six rules are
"paired-comparisons" rules because they rely on that matrix. The final set of
rules use a variety of different approaches.

1-5. Rank-Scoring Rules
1. Plurality Voting
Plurality voting is the most common method of ranking candidates in an
election and is used in almost every political election in the United States.
from giving each candidate 1/2 point in a tie. For example, if the score is 60 to 30 among 90 of the
voters, with 10 ties, normalizing the scores results in a 66.6 to 33.3 election, while adding 1/2 point
makes the score 65 to 35. What if a voter fails to rank some candidates? In our empirical work
computing various schemes, we assume a ranked candidate is preferable to an unranked candidate.
This means a single unranked candidate losses every head-to-head comparison and is effectively
ranked last. If two or more candidates are unranked, we may place them in a tie for last place on
the ballot and then treat the tie vote in one of the two ways described above.
3
If there is no Condorcet Winner, there must be a voting cycle, but not vice versa. An example of
an election with a Condorcet winner and a cycle is a > b, a > c, a > d, b > c, c > d, d > b. Here a
beats the other three candidates, who are in a cycle.

An Introduction to Vote-Counting Schemes

7

Under plurality election rules, each voter picks a single most preferred candidate. The candidate with the most votes wins. In an election with more than
two candidates, a candidate does not necessarily need a majority vote to win.
Bill Clinton won the 1992 presidential election with less than 50 percent of the
vote.
When there are only two candidates in an election, plurality voting is the
natural choice as an election rule: it is simply the rule of the majority. With
three or more candidates, however, plurality voting can lead to disturbing
results. Suppose there is an election with three candidates, two of whom have
closely related views, while the third candidate has a radically different platform. Even if a large majority would choose either of the two related candidates
over the third candidate, the third candidate might win if the majority split its
votes between the two similar candidates.
In an indirect way, this coordination failure may have even changed the
presidency of the United States. As told by Lowell Anderson (1990), the story
starts with the 1966 Democratic primary for the governor of Maryland:

George P. Mahoney received about 40 percent of the vote while his two
opponents, Thomas Finan and Carlton Sickles, each received about 30
percent. Both Finan and Sickles are relatively liberal, and Maryland is a
relatively liberal state. Mahoney is an unabashed ultraconservative, and it
is extremely unlikely that he could have beaten either Finan or Sickles in a
one-on-one contest. Maryland is a heavily Democrat state. However, in the
main election, many Democrats could not support the ultraconservative
Mahoney, and sufficiently many crossed over to vote Republican that the
Republican candidate won. It is widely believed that had either Finan or
Sickles won the Democrat primary, then he would have beaten the (at that
time) relatively obscure Spiro T. Agnew, in the main race. Agnew won,
was later elected vice-president, and then resigned under pressure.
Richard Nixon nominated Gerald Ford in Agnew's place and, when Nixon
resigned, Ford became president.

The rest, as they say, is history.
While most presidential elections involve only two serious candidates,
redistributing the votes that went to serious third-party candidates (Wallace,
Anderson, Perot) would have had the potential to swing an election. The
coordination failures of plurality rule tend to be most glaring in a primary,
where one often finds more than two serious candidates.
However, we should emphasize that the number of candidates in an
election is not exogenous. It is partly determined by the type of electoral system
in use. One of the consequences of using plurality rule is that it leads the
outcome towards a two-party system. This empirical result is known as
Duverger's law. When there are more than two parties, people tend to abandon

8

Journal of Economic Perspectives

the third party so as not to waste their votes.4 This may not be a bad thing; an
electoral voting rule that did a better job of representing preferences over more
than two candidates might result in a proliferation of candidates, and the
resulting factionalization could be worse for the democracy in the long run (as
Douglas Rae explores in this issue). Since the job of winnowing a large number
of candidates in a primary is quite different from the job of choosing between a
smaller number in the general election, society might consider using a different
voting rule for primaries and for the general election.
1a. Multiple-Winner Extensions
If an election is to produce multiple winners, there are several extensions
of plurality rule. One option, used to elect the legislature in Japan, is the
"single nontransferable vote." Everyone gets one vote, and we simply pick the
top several candidates based on the plurality voting. Under cumulative voting,
voters are given a number of votes equal to the number of winners desired.5
Depending on the rules, voters may or may not assign more than one of their
votes to a single candidate. The candidates with the highest vote totals win the
election.
In theory, cumulative voting is designed to foster minority representation.
In an election with ten positions to fill, any group that controls 10 percent of
the vote has the opportunity to elect one candidate. How these coalitions might
form is less clear, and failure to coordinate could result in a loss of electoral
power. In this regard, the single transferable vote electoral system (discussed
below) is a more satisfactory method, although it is more complicated.
2. Approval Voting
Approval voting was invented in the 1970s. It is the only method we
consider that does not require voters to rank the candidates. Instead, voters
approve or disapprove each candidate on the ballot—that is, they select some
subset of candidates. Candidates are ranked by the number of voters who
approve them, and the highest ranked candidate (or candidates if more than
one winner is required) wins. Thus with three candidates A, B and C, a voter
has the opportunity either to vote for A or against A (by approving both B and
C). Approving all three candidates is equivalent to not voting since it has no
differential impact. Approval voting is the most frequently adopted alternative
to plurality rule and is now used by several professional associations to elect
their officers (Brams and Nagel, 1991). Robert Weber's companion article
focuses on this voting method.
4

This argument is a bit specious, since nearly all votes are wasted in the sense that they do not
determine the outcome of an election. And votes are equally well wasted on a party with a large
lead. Evidence from the '94 elections suggests that Duverger's law may be breaking down.
5
Endorsement of cumulative voting was one of the "radical" positions taken by Lani Guinier. For a
popular discussion, see The New York Times Magazine, Feb. 27, 1994.

Jonathan Levin and Barry Nalebuff 9

A variant of approval voting can be used if we do not require a fixed
number of winners, but rather a level of acceptance. We can set a quota and
declare as winners any candidates reaching that quota. The election of baseball
players to the Hall of Fame employs this form of approval voting. Sportswriters
vote up or down on each candidate, and candidates who receive a certain
(previously specified) number of votes head for Cooperstown.6
3. Runoff Voting
In runoff voting, or a "double election," voters rank the candidates, and
votes are tabulated just as in a plurality election. If one candidate commands a
majority vote, that candidate wins the election. If no candidate receives more
than half the votes, we have a runoff election between the two candidates. The
winner of the head-to-head runoff wins the election. Again, variations exist to
runoff voting. In New York City primaries, the top two candidates engage in a
runoff if the top candidate receives less than 40 percent of the vote in the
primary. In France, candidates must also garner a certain minimum vote in
order to participate in the runoff election. This has sometimes led to the
peculiar result of a runoff election with only one candidate on the ballot, which
then leads to imaginative and colorful voter responses (Rosenthal and Sen,
1980)!
In a multi-candidate election, runoff voting can prevent some of the
potentially skewed results generated by a plurality count. Suppose we have four
candidates, three similar candidates who evenly divide 70 percent of the vote,
and a radically different candidate who commands a 30 percent minority. The
30 percent candidate would win outright under plurality, but would suffer a
sound defeat in a runoff against any one of the other three candidates.
4. Single Transferable Vote
The single transferable vote, also known as "Cincinnati Rules" or "Hare
voting," extends the logic of runoff voting by eliminating no more than one
candidate at a time. A single transferable vote election with only one winner is
sometimes called the "alternative vote." We consider this case first. Voters
begin by ranking the candidates. If any candidate is ranked first by a majority,
that candidate wins immediately. If no winner exists, we eliminate the candidate with the fewest first place votes and tabulate the ballots again as if that
candidate never existed. This means votes for the losing candidate get redistributed to one of the remaining candidates. If still no candidate controls a
majority, we again delete the candidate with the fewest votes and repeat the
process. Eventually, barring a tie, a winner must emerge.
When there are many candidates and multiple winners, the algorithm for a
single transferable vote becomes considerably more complex. However, it still
6

Actually, there is an upper bound on the number of players a sportswriter may list on his or her
ballot. T h e limit is ten players, which is high enough that except in extraordinary years, the vote
ceiling is rarely a factor.

10

Journal of Economic Perspectives

works quite well in theory and in practice, rinding use in New York City school
board and Cambridge city council elections. With multiple winners, each one
cannot control a majority, but rather should control some dominant share.
Following the logic of the majority winner, we want this share (or quota) to be
as small as possible, yet big enough to allow no more than the desired number
of winners. For example, with two winners, we would require a winning
candidate to control at least 34 percent of the vote. This is the smallest
percentage that could be gained by no more than two candidates.7
Now suppose there are w winners and a corresponding quota q. The
election runs as above until we find the first winner. When a candidate exceeds
the vote quota, single transferable vote rules specify that the winner's
surplus—that is, the number of votes the candidate receives over the quota—be
redistributed to the voters' second-place choices. We call the surplus s, where
s = total votes received – q, and divide it up using the following method: the
winner receives a score of q and is then deleted from the ballots. Next, we
tabulate who receives the transferred votes, but count them not as one full
point, but as s/(s + q). This weighting ensures that the sum of all candidate's
scores remains equal to the number of votes originally cast, which in turn
guarantees that we do not exceed w winners (recall that we chose the quota big
enough so that not more than w candidates could control a share q). If the
transferred votes result in another winner, we repeat the surplus distribution
process for the new winner. The election ends when w candidates reach the
quota.8
One attractive feature of single transferable vote in a multi-winner election
stems from the fact that it theoretically leads to proportional representation. A
united minority can elect candidates in proportion to the size of the minority,
ensuring diverse representation and avoiding tyranny of the majority. Suppose
a region can elect six representatives. Any candidate who can control 17
percent of the vote will win, so that of course a dominant majority candidate
will win, but beyond that, a candidate ranked second or third by a majority may
or may not defeat a candidate with a small but loyal minority base. Also, unlike
cumulative voting, there is no need to coordinate. If two candidates appeal to
the same group, some voters can rank them 1 and 2 and the others 2 and 1,
and the group will not lose its voice. In particular, single transferable vote
avoids gerrymandering district lines to ensure minority representation (as
7
In general, we define a quota q = [ n / ( w + 1)] + 1, where n is the number of voters, w is the
desired number of winners, and the bracket notation [x] means "greatest integer less than x." This
choice achieves the goal of having the smallest possible quota such that no more than w candidates
may exceed it. This discussion oversimplifies the quota issue; N. Tideman's companion paper in
this issue offers a more thorough examination.
8
I n the Cambridge and New York elections, votes are hand counted, a practice fixed by law.
Because of this, rather than assign transferred votes a weight of s/(s + q), s/(s + q) ballots are
randomly selected as transferred votes, and count as one full vote. Clearly, this is less preferable,
because it adds an element of randomness to the election. Even with this time-saving procedure,
Cambridge city council elections have taken as long as a week to be counted.

An Introduction to Vote-Counting Schemes

11

discussed in Pildes and Niemi, 1993). If congressional elections were done on a
statewide basis using single transferable vote, there would be no need to engage
in the time-consuming and controversial act of redistricting following each
census.
5. Coombs Voting
Clyde Coombs (1964) suggests a variant of the alternative vote. In successive rounds, instead of deleting the candidate with the fewest first-place votes,
we eliminate the candidate with the most last-place votes. The election ends
when only the desired number of winners remains. Unlike Hare voting, where
candidates may qualify as winners in early rounds, Coombs voting always
requires the full number of rounds. Duncan Black (1958, p. 69) describes an
identical scheme called "exhaustive voting," which requires voters to approve
all but one of the remaining candidates in each round. After each round of
voting, the candidate with the fewest votes is eliminated. Again, the election
ends when we reach the desired number of winners.9
Coombs voting loses some of its appeal in the light of analysis by Myerson
(1993) and Cox (1990). Under Coombs voting, a candidate who takes a stance
favored by a majority of voters may lose if all the other candidates take the
opposite position. For examples, suppose 75 percent of the electorate favors a
certain proposition, but only one of five candidates supports it. The views of the
candidates are identical on all other issues. Then 25 percent of the voters will
rank the differing candidate last, while the majority, the 75 percent, if they split
their last place votes equally, give each of the other four candidates less than 20
percent of the last place votes. Even though 75 percent of the electorate agreed
with the proposition, the candidate in favor will be the first eliminated.

6–11. Paired-Comparisons Rules
6. Borda Voting
Jean-Charles de Borda, in a paper that marks the beginning of serious
study in voting theory, proposed this elementary rule to the French Academy
of Sciences in 1770. Suppose there are k candidates. Voters submit their
rankings, and candidates receive k – 1 points for every first place vote, k – 2
points for every second place vote, and so on. We rank the candidates by their
total points. Borda voting is a familiar scheme and is widely used to rank
candidates or teams—the AP football poll is one example. Since every point a
candidate receives may be considered a head-to-head vote against some other
candidate, Borda scores are equal to the total number of head-to-head votes a
9

It is easy to imagine other reverse elimination schemes. For example, the Nanson rule, which
eliminates candidates based on their Borda scores, appears in the Appendix.

12

Journal of Economic Perspectives

candidate receives. This means we can count Borda scores by writing a pairedcomparisons matrix and summing the rows to generate the candidates' scores.10
Interestingly, a Condorcet winner will not necessarily win a Borda election.
We show a very simple example of this phenomenon with the pairwisecomparisons matrix and three candidates:

a
b
c

a

b

c

0
49
49

51
0
35

51
65
0

b
c
Borda
a
114
84
Scores
102
a is a Condorcet winner but
b wins under Borda rules.

Here, the Condorcet winner a defeats b and c by a minimal margin, 51-49,
while b beats c, 65-35. This election raises the question of whether one winner
is intrinsically better than the other. As b beats c so decisively, we can be fairly
sure that b is preferable to c, but less sure about the contests involving a. On a
different day, with slightly different voter turnout, b or c might well beat a, but
it is unlikely that c would beat b. In such cases, the Borda winner may have a
better claim on the election (as Peyton Young discusses in this issue).
We should note that there are an infinite number of possible variations to
the basic Borda scheme.11 For example, the choice of a linear point system is
somewhat arbitrary; there is no reason to suppose that ordinal rankings should
translate neatly into linear preferences. By manipulating the point values, we
could arrive at dozens of alternative schemes.
Additional variations to Borda can be created by coupling it with other
systems such as Coombs voting. E. J. Nanson, an Australian mathematician,
worked on voting theory between 1875 and 1922. He proposed a variation of
Borda voting that applies the Borda score in successive rounds. Under the
Nanson rule, any candidate with a below-average Borda score is eliminated.12
We then recompute Borda scores and repeat the elimination procedure. The
last remaining candidate wins the election. This resembles Coombs voting as
described earlier, except that low Borda scores substitute for last-place votes.
7. Copeland Voting
A. H. Copeland (1951) proposed the obvious paired-comparisons scheme
where candidates are scored by their win-loss record across all head-to-head
competitions. Employing the win-loss matrix, we sum the rows to determine
each candidate's Copeland score. The sum of row i is equal to the number of
pairwise wins candidate i has minus the number of losses. Equivalently, we
might rank candidates by their winning percentages.
10
Obviously, from its original description, Borda voting could also be thought of as a rank-scoring
rule.
11
Duncan Black (1958) proposed a compromise between Borda and Condorcet. Under the Black
rule, we compare candidates based on their head-to-head performances. If a Condorcet winner
exists, that candidate wins the election. Otherwise, the candidate with the highest Borda score wins.
12
If there are n voters and k candidates, the "average" score is n(k/2).

Jonathan Levin and Barry Nalebuff

13

An example of Copeland scoring in sports occurs when competitors play a
round-robin, and the teams or individuals are ranked by their number of
victories. The first rounds of the Olympic hockey competition and the World
Cup finals use this method.13 When we use a Copeland system, we must also
adopt a contingency plan for ties, since they may occur in the case of a cycle.
Both the Olympics and the World Cup use total goals as a tiebreaker.
We might say intuitively that since professional sports leagues rank teams
by winning percentages, they are using Copeland rules; but, if we consider each
game between two teams as equivalent to the decision of a single voter, they are
actually using Borda scoring. That is, teams are ranked by their total number of
victories (or votes) over all head-to-head contests. In baseball, for example,
teams in the same league play each other either 12 or 13 times each season,
and 12 or 13 decisions are scored—under Copeland scoring, the winner of the
season series would get one point. Of course in sports, rather than having
ballots with rankings, we are truly interested in observing the n(n – 1)/2
pairwise contests separately.
A Copeland winner must defeat all other candidates if a Condorcet winner
exists. Even when there is no Condorcet winner, the Copeland winner dominates every other candidate in the sense that he either defeats him directly or
defeats a third candidate who defeats him (Maurer, 1978; Miller, 1980). We say
he can defeat any other candidate through a chain of length one or two.14
However, just as several candidates might tie for first in a Copeland election,
more than one candidate could dominate each of the others through a chain of
length one or two.
8. Minimum Violations
Minimum violations is the first computationally difficult method we cover.
After voters rank the candidates, we tabulate the head-to-head votes to determine the winner of each matchup. We then consider each permutation of the
candidates a, b, c, and so on, as a potential ranking. The best ranking,
according to the minimum violations criteria, is the permutation that has the
fewest "contradictions," where by contradiction we mean that a candidate with
lower rank defeats a candidate with higher rank.
One method to compute a minimum violations ranking is to use the
win-loss matrix and maximize the sum of the entries above the diagonal by
permuting the rows and columns. From this algorithm, we can see that the
winning list of candidates will never display the feature that a candidate is
ranked immediately above another who defeated her head-to-head. If this were
the case, the list that switches only these two candidates would result in one less
violation and no other changes.
13
In order to encourage aggressive offensive play, the World Cup now treats ties in a novel
manner, awarding both teams one point. When one team wins a game, they receive three points to
the loser's zero. Devaluing a tie is meant to provide both teams with incentives to play more
exciting soccer.
14
However, Niemi and Riker (1976) note that under certain conditions, the Copeland method can
choose as the winner a candidate who loses by near unanimity to the Borda winner.

14

Journal of Economic Perspectives

If there are no cycles, the minimum violations results will be identical to
the Copeland ranking, and this order will be a zero violations ranking. Problems can arise if there are voting cycles, because in this instance a zero
violations ranking does not exist, the best ranking is not necessarily unique,
and the minimum violations criterion provides no particular way of resolving
these ambiguities.
9. Ranked Pairs
Condorcet's (1785) seminal paper expresses the idea that a candidate who
would defeat each of the others head-to-head should win the election. If no
such candidate exists, then large majorities should take precedence over small
majorities in breaking cycles. In his own words, the general rule was "to take
successively all the propositions that have a majority, beginning with those
possessing the largest. As soon as these first decisions produce a result, it
should be taken as a decision, without regard for the less probable decisions
that follow." How is this idea implemented? Consider all the possible lists that
order the candidates from top to bottom. Find the largest margin of victory in
any pairwise match—and then eliminate all potential rankings that contradict
this preference. For example, if the largest victory is for candidate a over
candidate b, eliminate all potential rankings which place b above a. Next,
consider the second largest margin of victory, and eliminate all potential
rankings that disagree. Continue this process until only one ranking remains.
With only three candidates, this method is well defined and is equivalent to
ignoring the election with the smallest margin of victory. The problem is that in
elections with four or more candidates, considering the largest unconsidered
margin of victory may, at some point, force us to eliminate all remaining
potential rankings (by locking in a cycle). Condorcet does not discusses this
possibility, an omission which has led to criticism and some confusion.
T. N. Tideman suggests one solution to the dilemma of cycles: simply skip
over a head-to-head result that will lock in a cycle. Tideman further notes that
if ties exist, there may be more than one potential ranking left even after we
have considered all victories. In this case, we declare a tie among the candidates
who have first-place ranks in the remaining potential rankings. Tideman calls
this scheme "ranked pairs."
In the pairwise-comparisons matrix below, we first lock in a > b, then
b > c. This implies that a > c. The next largest victory is c > a, but this locks in
a cycle, so we ignore that head-to-head result. We then lock in a > d, b > d,
c > d, which leaves us with a final ranking a > b > c > d.
a
b
c
d

a
0
39
59
49

b
61
0
40
49

c
41
60
0
49

d
51
51
51
0

We further discuss this example in the Kemeny-Young section.

An Introduction to Vote-Counting Schemes

15

10. Simpson-Kramer Min-Max Rule
The Simpson-Kramer min-max rule adheres to the principles offered by
Condorcet in that it emphasizes large majorities over small majorities. A
candidate's "max" score is the largest number of votes against that candidate
across all head-to-head matchups. The rule selects the candidates with the
minimum max score. A Condorcet winner will always be a min-max winner.
When there is a cycle, we can think of the min-max winner as being the
"least-objectionable" candidate. It is the person whose biggest defeat is the
closest to 50: 50. Large majorities take precedence over small majorities in that
we are willing to ignore defeats if they are close enough to 50: 50.
While the min-max rule works well for choosing the winner of an election,
it may be less effective as a ranking technique, especially when a dominant
Condorcet winner exists. In the election below, candidate a defeats all others
by a large margin. As a result, the other candidates are ranked solely by their
performances against a, while their head-to-head matchups are disregarded.
Despite beating b and c head-to-head, candidate d places last in the election by
virtue of having the poorest score against a.

a
b
c
d

a

b

c

d

0
39
37
36

61
0
51
55

63
49
0
56

64
45
44
0

Min-Max a
b
c
d
39 61 63 64
Scores

11. Kemeny-Young Method
H. Peyton Young (1988) concluded that Condorcet intended to rank
candidates in the order with which the most voters agree. In other words, we
should maximize the number of head-to-head votes that agree with the ranking
(or minimize the number of votes that disagree). As it turns out, Kemeny (1959)
had suggested a method identical to the Young interpretation.
Kemeny-Young voting is very similar to the minimum violations method,
except that it emphasizes decisive wins over smaller majority margins. Again,
begin by considering all possible rankings of the candidates. However, instead
of maximizing the sum of the entries in the upper diagonal of the win-loss
matrix, Kemeny-Young voting uses the paired-comparisons matrix. The example nearby demonstrates this process. The left-hand pairwise-comparisons matrix shows the original rankings. The sum of entries in the upper right half is
51 + 45 + 58 + 53 + 44 + 49 = 300. Note that a cycle exists in these rankings: c > a, d > c, and a > d. Kemeny-Young resolves this cycle by placing
c > a, a > d and c > d. In the right-hand matrix, the sum of the upper

16

Journal of Economic Perspectives

diagonal is 55 + 49 + 47 + 58 + 51 + 56 = 316.

a
b
c
d

a
0
49
55
42

b
51
0
47
56

c
45
53
0
51

d
58
44
49
0

c
a
d
b

c
0
45
51
53

a
55
0
42
49

d
49
58
0
44

b
47
51
56
0

How do these rankings make c end up first? After all, although c beats a
decisively, it loses to both b and d. Well, c must beat a, because the largest
majorities must be respected. However, c cannot be immediately ahead of either
b or d. Just as in the minimum violations ranking, a candidate cannot be
ranked directly above another candidate who defeated her head-to-head. If c
must be ahead of a, but cannot be one place ahead of either b or d, then the
one possible position for c is first. Because a defeats d decisively, we place a
ahead of d, and the rest follows. If b or d complain that they "should" have
won the election, based on pairwise results with c, the Kemeny-Young answer is
that both b and d clearly deserve to be defeated by a, and thus have a weak
claim to victory.
When there is a Condorcet winner, Kemeny-Young and minimum violations both rank that winner first. Differences appears when there are cycles.
The minimum violations winner in the above election is not c, but a. Minimum
violations actually ranks c last.
It is also interesting to compare the min-max and Kemeny-Young methods. Again, both will rank a Condorcet winner first. But if there is a cycle, the
Kemeny-Young and the min-max rule may not agree on the winner; and even
if a Condorcet winner exists, they may not rank the lower candidates in the
same order. In the example above, the min-max ranking is cabd; the KemenyYoung rank is cadb. Examples can readily be created where the two methods
pick dramatically different winners. In the example in the ranked-pairs section,
candidate d, who receives 49 votes in each pairwise competition, is the min-max
winner, and yet places last under Kemeny-Young rules. This disparity makes
sense in that a, b, and c are locked in a cycle. It would be hard to make an
argument that candidate d should be inserted into the middle of the cycle
rather than placed above or below it. Interestingly, Caplin and Nalebuff (1988)
prove that in a spatial voting model—where voters each have a most preferred
point and each candidate occupies a position in Euclidean space—this outcome
could not occur. In particular, the ranked-pairs winner will agree with the
min-max winner because no cycle can occur if we restrict attention to majorities
larger than the biggest margin involving the min-max winner.

Jonathan Levin and Barry Nalebuff

17

12–13. Methods Derived from Sports Tournaments
12. Kendall-Wei / Power Rank Method
Kendall-Wei extends the Copeland method by attempting to account not
only for a candidate's head-to-head wins but for the strength of the candidates
beaten. To find the Kendall-Wei scores, we begin by giving each candidate a
score equal to that candidate's number of pairwise wins. We then give each
candidate a second score equal to the number of wins earned by candidates she
defeated. In the third iteration, each candidate's score equals the sum of the
second round scores of the candidates she defeated. The process continues; at
each stage, the candidate's score is equal to the sum of the previous round
scores of the candidates she defeated. This results in each candidate having an
infinite sequence of scores. As it turns out, these sequences converge, and we
call the convergent limits Kendall-Wei scores.
It would be impossible to carry these calculations ad infinitum. Fortunately, we can find the limits of these sequences through an elegant shortcut.
Writing the win-loss matrix and counting 1 point for wins and 0 for losses
(instead of – 1), we find the eigenvector v associated with the largest positive
eigenvalue of the matrix. If W is the win-loss matrix, and l is its largest positive
eigenvector, we find a vector v, where Wv = lv. This vector is the candidates'
Kendall-Wei scores.
This method only works if there is a cycle, otherwise the matrix W will
have no nonzero eigenvalues. We present an example with a cycle below:

a
b
W =

c
d

a

b

c

d

0
0
0
0

1
0
0
1

1
1

1
0
1
0

0
0

a
b
1 = 1 v =
c
d

3
1
1
1

Because the Kendall-Wei method does not resolve cycles, we offer an
extension called the power rank method. This compares to Kendall-Wei except
that it uses the paired-comparisons matrix rather than the win-loss matrix, and
does not require a voting cycle. Given the paired-comparisons matrix A, power
rank scores are defined by the eigenvector belonging to the matrix's largest
positive eigenvalue. We present an example below:
a
a
b
W =c
d

0
3
4
1

b

c

d

7

6

0
3
6

7

9
4
8
0

0
2

a
b
1 ~ 13.9 v ~ c
d

34
24
25
17

18

Journal of Economic Perspectives

In this election, candidate a dominates the other candidates, and receives
by far the highest power ranking. Although b beats c convincingly, 7-3, c earns
the highest power score by virtue of stronger performances against a and d. As
a comparison, the Borda method would agree with the power rank method,
while the Kemeny-Young and ranked-pairs rules would rank b above c. The
min-max rule, the Copeland rule, and the minimum violations method would
place them in a tie.
13. Jech Method (Maximum Likelihood Estimation)
The Jech method, also proposed by Zermelo (1929), Bradley and Terry
(1952), and Ford (1957), is a probabilistic ranking method. Jech's (1983) goal is
to provide an ordering of the candidates that not only demonstrates whether i
is superior to j, but also by how much. Each candidate i is given a strength Ti.
Given these strengths, Jech defines a probability matrix p where the probability
that i defeats j in a pairwise election (or game) is pij = Ti/(Ti + Tj). Jech
makes two assumptions: first, that odds multiply and second, that expected
wins equal actual wins. Jech proves that only one matrix exists that satisfies this
criteria. Candidates (or teams) receive a score equal to their expected winning
percentage. In an election, this ranking is equivalent to the Copeland method.
This can be viewed as an independent argument for using the Jech method.
For sports teams, Jech's method works even if not all teams play one another.
In this case, Jech's method predicts the number of wins a team might have in a
full round-robin tournament (essentially an expected Copeland score).

Choosing an Appropriate Voting System
In the examples we looked at, there was surprisingly little difference
between the winners under the various election methods. We tested nine of the
methods—plurality, single transferable vote, Borda, Copeland, min-max,
Kendall-Wei, power ranking, minimum violations, and Kemeny-Young—using
voting data from British union elections. All elections were multi-candidate
elections where voters ranked their preferences. With the exception of plurality
rule, all the other methods obtained similar results. Plurality rule frequently
resulted in a different winner than the other methods, and single transferable
vote occasionally led to a different outcome. The other methods essentially
differed only when there was a voting cycle, and even then, it did not affect the
winner. While rankings were not identical, a Condorcet winner typically
emerged, and this winner tended to be the Borda winner as well.
Given the variety of election formats, and that their results do not differ so
dramatically, it is natural to ask how to choose among them. The answer may
depend on which features of a voting rule are most important in a particular
situation. We consider five aspects that distinguish the various methods.

An Introduction to Vote-Counting Schemes

19

Level of Complexity
A voting method should be relatively simple and transparent, both for
voters and for those calculating the winner. The tolerable level of complexity
depends on how many voters and candidates there are, who the voters are, and
what purpose the election serves.
Simplicity helps explain why plurality voting is so widespread and why
approval voting and Borda voting are the two most frequently used alternatives. The U.S. presidential election is something of an anomaly to this principle
of simplicity—hence the periodic calls for a direct (plurality) election to replace
the electoral college. In some cases, we accept greater complexity to gain
accuracy. For example, the professional tennis rankings and The New York Times
college football rankings (forms of power ranking) both require a computer for
calculation. They can account for a great deal of information, much more than
if we ranked tennis players simply by total matches won or tournaments won.
Voting in a single transferable vote election is straightforward; the main
hurdle would be explaining the vote-counting procedure to voters and establishing the legitimacy of the system. Here, charts can be extremely useful.
Edwin Newman and Miles Rogers (1952), in their analysis of the 1951 Cambridge city election, compare cumulative voting outcomes where the voters are
given between 1 and 9 votes (there were nine city council seats). In their chart,
presented as Table 1, we see how the candidates move up and down the
rankings as voters are allowed more choices. The graph clearly demonstrates
the importance of second, third and lower-place choices in capturing voter
preferences. Note how candidate 20 rises from seventh to second place, candidate 06 rises from eighteenth to eighth position, and candidate 14 drops from
fifth to twelfth.
The issue of how voters express preferences on a ballot is separate from
how the preferences are combined. When a corporate board votes on a set of
well-defined proposals, it would be reasonable to ask the board members to
rank their preferences. A board member would presumably be well informed
and interested, so we could use a more involved paired-comparisons technique
to determine the winning choice. On the other hand, in an election for student
government, with many candidates and mostly disinterested voters, ranking
candidates could be capricious. Instead, we might ask voters to approve or
disapprove each candidate, or approve a set number, or just pick their favorite.
Simplicity is a relative term.

Voter Strategies
In an election, the possibility always exists for voters to cast their ballots
strategically, rather than in accordance with their true preferences. All voting
systems are susceptible to strategizing. For example, in a three-candidate
plurality election, a voter might vote for her second choice if her preferred

20

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Table 1

Plurality Count with Each Number of Choices

Jonathan Levin and Barry Nalebuff 21

candidate lags far behind in preelection polls. An honest vote might be considered "wasted." Another person might vote for the lagging candidate as a
protest vote, even if she did not prefer that candidate over the others. Or
suppose two of the three candidates—the ones with relatively similar views—are
running neck and neck. Supporters of the first might rank their candidate first
and the other last, even if in truth they would have chosen the other as their
second choice. In recognition of this danger of strategizing, Borda wrote that
his method was appropriate only for honest voters. For this reason, Borda
counting works well when there is little incentive to strategize—for example, in
the AP sports poll where writers, in general, have no vested interest in the
outcome of the poll.
Voter strategizing provides a counterargument to the benefit of simplicity;
the more complex schemes are harder to strategize and by their very complexity may help promote honest behavior.

Candidate Strategies
Electoral systems may influence candidate strategies as well. In plurality
voting, a minority candidate could win if two similar candidates split the
majority vote. Because of this, some candidates would do better to generate
strong minority support instead of trying to attract a majority vote. Cox (1987,
1990) confirms this suspicion, finding that candidates do best by solidifying
minority support rather than taking centrist positions. Myerson (1993) shows
that in a two-candidate plurality election, candidates fare best when exactly half
the electorate are promised benefits above the average. As the number of
candidates increases, Myerson demonstrates that the optimum strategy shifts:
candidates do better by promising the bulk of the resources to a smaller and
smaller minority, seeking to cultivate a small bloc of strong support rather than
widespread appeal.
When there are only two candidates, the approval voting and plurality rule
lead to the same incentives. As the number of candidates increases, the incentives are different under approval voting. Here, to win broad approval, the
optimum campaign strategy is to spread the bulk of the resources over a larger
and larger segment of the electorate.
For single transferable vote elections, more than one possible equilibrium
exists. Candidates might opt to seek majority support, but they might also
choose to cultivate minority support at the expense of the majority. Suppose all
but one candidate offer a distribution of benefits to voters that equals the
distribution that each of these candidates would have granted in a plurality
election with four candidates. The final candidate offers a uniform distribution
of benefits, seeking majority support. She will be the very first candidate
eliminated, even though head-to-head she would defeat any of the others. If
the final candidate chooses the optimum strategy for a five-candidate plurality
election, she will rank first in each stage until only four candidates remain, but

22

Journal of Economic Perspectives

will face elimination at this stage, as all the other candidates have taken the
optimum four-candidate strategy.
All paired-comparisons methods, including the Borda rule, offer candidates precisely the same incentives. Rather than encouraging candidates to seek
minority support, candidates in a paired-comparisons election do best to appeal
to a majority.15 We see this intuitively if we look at the head-to-head comparisons as simultaneous two-candidate plurality elections, all of which are symmetric. A candidate wants to do well in each of these individual head-to-head
contests, hence the two-candidate plurality strategy.
Ranking vs. Picking a Winner
In an election to fill an office, we care solely about determining one
winner. In other elections, we need to elect several candidates. In a weekly
football poll, the number one team matters, but we also want to know the
rankings of the other teams as well. These different goals suggest different
voting rules. Methods that use a good deal of the information available on the
ballots, such as Kendall-Wei, power rank, Jech, Borda, Copeland, and
Kemeny-Young work particularly well for ranking all the candidates. Each of
these takes into account a candidate's or a team's head-to-head performance
against each of the other teams. Kendall-Wei and Copeland count only wins
and losses; the more complex of these ranking techniques, Jech, power rank,
and Kemeny-Young, consider the margins of victory as well. Single transferable
vote works well only when the quota is adjusted based on the number of
candidates we seek to rank.
Plurality, approval voting, and min-max are better suited for choosing the
winner of the election than ranking the candidates. Plurality works poorly for
ranking mainly because it also takes into account only first-place rankings, and
thus discards much of the available information. For example, a candidate who
ranks second on every ballot, but first on none, probably deserves a relatively
high rank, yet plurality gives that candidate zero votes. Min-max works poorly
on the lower rankings when one candidate wins by an enormous margin. All
the remaining candidates are then ranked solely by their performance against
the strong candidate—because that will be their minimum vote—regardless of
how they fare against each of the others. A candidate with only one head-to-head
loss might wind up last with a bad enough defeat against the winner.
Minority Support and the Safe Choice
Suppose a business wants to introduce a new brand of cereal. They do not
want to market a cereal that everyone picks as the second or third best but no
one picks first. Consumers will buy the cereal they like best. It doesn't matter
whether they like a cereal second best or fifth best; they won't buy it. The
15
Similarly, following Cox (1987), candidates have an incentive to adopt positions close to the
political center. Cox uses a spatial model of voter preferences and shows that there is an
equilibrium of candidate strategies when candidates adopt the position of the median voter.

An Introduction to Vote-Counting Schemes

23

company should market a cereal that generates strong preferences, even if
some tasters rank it very low. Counting systems such as plurality or weighted
Condorcet, which emphasize strong preferences, work better for product testing than methods such as min-max or Borda, which reward consensus and
wide approval.
Elections are different from product testing. The usual goal is a candidate
who appeals to a large portion of the electorate, rather than one who draws
forceful support from a strong minority. When the objective is to pick a "safe"
choice, systems like approval voting or min-max will favor the least objectionable over more controversial candidates. Similarly, Borda rewards strong preferences to an extent, but a winning Borda candidate will probably not have
alienated a large minority. A candidate who places second or third on each
ballot stands a strong chance in a Borda, approval or min-max election, even
though such a candidate has little hope of winning a weighted Condorcet or
plurality election.

Conclusion
If the multitude of available vote-counting systems leaves you overwhelmed, you are not alone. Several of the relatively simple schemes—such as
single transferable vote, Borda counting, min-max, Kemeny-Young, power
ranking, and approval voting—possess qualities that are often desirable. Others, such as Copeland, minimum violations, or Jech may be useful for specific
purposes. The diversity of questions we might ask about vote-counting procedures, their biases and their outcomes, is enormous. Many researchers, following Arrow's (1951) lead, have concerned themselves with stating various desirable or undesirable criteria and attempting to classify systems by these means.
In contrast, there are far fewer papers written concerning the application of
alternative systems in practice.
Despite the wealth of alternative voting mechanisms documented here,
plurality rule remains the overwhelming favorite choice. Why do alternatives to
plurality rule have such a difficult time being adopted?
Part of the answer is probably that when voter preferences are sufficiently
similar, a variety of voting systems will lead to similar choices, and these choices
will have desirable properties. In this case, the choice between voting systems
will seem to make little difference. In many other cases, society does not have a
consensus about what the goals of an electoral system should be. One is to
establish legitimacy of the victor. A second is to encourage participation. A third
may be to discourage the formation of a large number of political parties. A
fourth is to assure a representative political system although the very definition
of "representativeness" is part of the problem. For participants in the system, a
fifth goal is often that "their side" improve its chances of winning.

24

Journal of Economic Perspectives

No voting system will satisfy everyone on all of these dimensions; the
choice is always between flawed alternatives. Between the entrenched power of
the status quo, and with conflicting theoretical guidance to help select a
second-best alternative, it is not surprising that electoral reform is difficult to
implement. Most of the variety in electoral schemes comes from the choice of
different metrics for measuring the distance between one ranking and another.
The Marquis de Condorcet (1785) believed that in an election, there exists
some underlying truth to be discovered—that one candidate should be the
"true" winner. We suggest a more modest conclusion, but one that might stop
us from looking for some perfect Holy Grail of a voting method that meets all
needs: a voting system can't find a consensus when none exists.

Appendix
Additional Voting Rules
Young Method
Peyton Young, whose interpretation of Condorcet's work we have already
described, proposed a separate method. Under the Young method, if there is
no Condorcet winner, each candidate receives a score equal to the largest
subset of voters for which that candidate is a Condorcet winner. The Young
winner is the candidate with the highest score. In the example below, b is the
Young as well as min-max winner.
#Voters
2
3
2
4

Ballot
a >b> c
b > c>a
b > a >c
c>a>b

Young
Scores

a
3

b
9

c

7

a
b
c

a

b

c

0
5

6
0
4

4

7

7
0

Here, a defeats the others if we count the two ballots that rank a first and
any one other ballot. To compute b's score, we count the 5 first-place ballots
and any 4 of the others, for a score of 9. Finally, for c we count the 4 first-place
ballots and any three of the others, for final scores of 3, 9, and 7. The final
ranking is bca. This method is similar to the min-max rule and will produce the
same winner so long as the number of last-place votes each candidate receives is
at least as large as that candidate's largest loss margin in a head-to-head match
(Tideman, 1993, ch. 13).
Dodgson Rule
Charles Dodgson, mathematician and author of Alice in Wonderland (under
the pen name Lewis Carroll) studied elections and lawn tennis tournaments at

Jonathan Levin and Barry Nalebuff

25

Oxford in the late 19th century. He agreed with Condorcet that a candidate
who is undefeated head-to-head should win an election, but felt that if a
Condorcet winner did not exist, the election should be called off. In discussing
this opinion, he proposed this method of scoring candidates: if there is no
Condorcet winner, the Dodgson rule holds that a candidate's score should be
defined to be the total number of inversions on individual ballots necessary to
make that candidate a Condorcet winner. More than one inversion may be
needed on some ballots to make a candidate a Condorcet winner. This sounds
difficult to compute, and it is.
A simplified Dodgson rule can be calculated directly from the pairedcomparisons matrix. To compute the simplified Dodgson scores, we write the
paired-comparisons matrix and for each candidate sum the vote difference in
each of that candidate's head-to-head losses. The simplified Dodgson winner is
the candidate who has the smallest total differential over all losses. The
simplified Dodgson method bears a close similarity to the Borda rule, in that if
we were to tabulate total differential over wins and losses, that is to sum the
differential over all wins and subtract the simplified Dodgson scores, we would
arrive at the Borda rankings.

Estimated Centrality
Discussed by T. N. Tideman and I. G. Good in 1976 (Tideman, 1993),
estimated centrality assumes that each candidate occupies some spatial position,
and that voters likewise have some ideal preferred point in space. Under
estimated centrality, the candidate who occupies that point in space closest to
the "median," or zero moment, of the voters' ideal points wins the election.
(We might, in fact, take any moment of the voter's ideal points—here we take
the zero moment.) Good and Tideman have proven that it is possible to use the
fraction of voters who place the candidates in each of the possible orders to
compute the estimated centrality winner, but the actual computation is still
quite difficult.

26

Journal of Economic Perspectives

References
Ali, I., W. D. Cook, and M. Kress, "On the
Minimum Violations Ranking of a Tournament," Management Science, June 1986, 32,
660–72.
Anderson, Lowell, "Voting and Paired
Comparisons." Extracted from Grotte, J., L.
Anderson, and M. Robinson, "Selected Judgmental Methods in Defense Analyses." Institute for Defense Analyses paper P-2387, 1990.
Anderson, Lowell, "How to Take Votes:
New Ideas on Better Ways to Determine Winners," research draft, Institute for Defense
Analyses, 1994.
Arrow, Kenneth J., Social Choice and Individual Values. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1951.
Black, Duncan, The Theory of Committees and
Elections. London: Cambridge University
Press, 1953.
Board of Elections, Cincinnati, Ohio, "Proportional Representation Count: Rules and
Instructions to Employees," 1955.
Bradley, R. A., and M. E. Terry, "The Rank
Analysis of Incomplete Block Designs. I. The
Method of Paired Comparisons," Biometrika,
1952, 39, 324–35.
Brams, Steven, and Jack Nagel, "Approval
Voting in Practice," Public Choice, August 1991,
71, 1–17.
Caplin, Andrew, and Barry Nalebuff, "On
64%-Majority Rule," Econometrica, July 1988,
56, 787–814.
Caplin, Andrew, and Barry Nalebuff, "Aggregation and Social Choice: A Mean Voter
Theorem," Econometrica, January 1991, 59,
1–24.
Condorcet, Marquis de, "Essay on the Application of Mathematics to the Theory of
Decision Making," 1785. In Baker, K., ed.,
Condorcet: Selected Writings. Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill, 1976.
Coombs, Clyde, A Theory of Data. New York:
Wiley, 1964.
Copeland, A. H., "A 'Reasonable' Social
Welfare Function," mimeo, University of
Michigan Seminar on Applications of Mathematics to the Social Sciences, 1951.
Cox, Gary W., "Electoral Equilibrium under Alternative Voting Institutions," American
Journal of Political Science, February 1987, 31,
82–108.
Cox, Gary W., "Centripetal and Centrifugal
Incentives in Electoral Systems," American
Journal of Political Science, November 1990, 34,
903–35.

David, H. A., "Ranking the Players in a
Round Robin Tournament," Review of the International Statistical Institute, 1971, 39:2,
137–47.
Ford, L. R., "Solution of a Ranking Problem
from Binary Comparisons," American Mathematical Monthly, 1957, 64, 28–33.
Goddard, Steven T., "Rankings in Tournaments and Group Decision-Making," Management Science, December 1983, 29, 1384–92.
Jech, Thomas, "The Ranking of Incomplete
Tournaments: A Mathematician's Guide to
Popular Sports," American Mathematical
Monthly, 1983, 90, 246–66.
Kemeny, John, "Mathematics Without
Numbers," Daedalus, Fall 1959, 88, 571–91.
Maurer, Stephen B., "The King Chicken
Theorems," working paper, Princeton University Mathematics Department, 1978.
Miller, N., "A New Solution Set for Tournaments and Majority Voting," American Journal
of Political Science, February 1980, 24, 68–96.
Myerson, Roger, "Incentives to Cultivate
Favored Minorities under Alternative Electoral Systems," American Political Science Review, December 1993, 87, 856–69.
Newman, Edwin B., and Miles Rogers, "PR
Voting: An Analysis of the 1951 Cambridge
City Election," unpublished (available from
Barry Nalebuff), 1952.
Niemi, Richard, and William Riker, "The
Choice of Voting Systems," Scientific American,
1976, 234:6, 21–7.
Pildes, Richard, and Richard Niemi, "Expressive Harms, 'Bizarre Districts,' and Voting
Rights: Evaluating Election-District Appearances after Shaw," working paper, University
of Michigan Law School, 1993.
Rosenthal, Howard, and Subrata Sen,
"Electoral Participation in the French Fifth
Republic," American Political Science Review,
March 1973, 67, 29–54.
Stob, Michael, "A Supplement to 'A Mathematician's Guide to Popular Sports,'" American Mathematical Monthly, May 1984, 91,
277–82.
Tideman, Nicolaus, "Collective Decisions
and Voting," draft, March 1993.
Young, H. Peyton, "Condorcet's Theory of
Voting," American Political Science Review, December 1988, 82, 1231–44.
Zermelo, E., "Die Berechnung der TurnierErgebnisse als ein Maximumproblem der
Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung," Math. Z.,
1929, 29, 436–60.

This article has been cited by:
1. Ritxar Arlegi, Dinko Dimitrov. 2020. Fair elimination-type competitions. European Journal of
Operational Research 287:2, 528-535. [Crossref]
2. Karla Motta Kiffer de Moraes, Luiz F. Autran M. Gomes. Success Factors in M&As of KnowledgeIntensive Firms in Brazil: Evidence from Consulting Engineering Companies 161-187. [Crossref]
3. James Green-Armytage, T. Nicolaus Tideman. 2020. Selecting the runoff pair. Public Choice 182:1-2,
119-137. [Crossref]
4. Olivier Hudry. Voting Procedures, Complexity of 543-572. [Crossref]
5. Michał Ramsza, Honorata Sosnowska. Trials of Characterizations of Anti-manipulation Method
21-37. [Crossref]
6. John Andraos. 2020. A proposed sustainability index for synthesis plans based on input provenance
and output fate: application to academic and industrial synthesis plans for vanillin as a case study.
Beilstein Journal of Organic Chemistry 16, 2338-2354. [Crossref]
7. Ashish Goel, Anilesh K. Krishnaswamy, Sukolsak Sakshuwong, Tanja Aitamurto. 2019. Knapsack
Voting for Participatory Budgeting. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation 7:2, 1-27.
[Crossref]
8. John Andraos. 2019. Aiming for a standardized protocol for preparing a process green synthesis report
and for ranking multiple synthesis plans to a common target product. Green Processing and Synthesis
8:1, 787-801. [Crossref]
9. Erwin Amann. Wohlfahrtsanalyse und kollektive Entscheidung 47-61. [Crossref]
10. Shanti P. Chakravarty. 2018. Democratic Participation. Homo Oeconomicus 35:3, 235-254. [Crossref]
11. Brian Hedden. 2018. Reasons, Coherence, And Group Rationality. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 4. . [Crossref]
12. Alexander Felfernig, Ludovico Boratto, Martin Stettinger, Marko Tkalčič. Decision Tasks and Basic
Algorithms 3-26. [Crossref]
13. Alexander Felfernig, Ludovico Boratto, Martin Stettinger, Marko Tkalčič. Algorithms for Group
Recommendation 27-58. [Crossref]
14. Alexander Felfernig, Ludovico Boratto, Martin Stettinger, Marko Tkalčič. Further Choice Scenarios
129-144. [Crossref]
15. Yifan Feng, Rene Caldentey, Christopher Thomas Ryan. 2018. Learning Customer Preferences from
Personalized Assortments. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
16. José Luis García-Lapresta, Miguel Martínez-Panero. 2017. Positional Voting Rules Generated by
Aggregation Functions and the Role of Duplication. International Journal of Intelligent Systems 32:9,
926-946. [Crossref]
17. Holger Fritze, Auriol Degbelo, Tobias Brüggentisch, Christian Kray. Feature-centric ranking
algorithms for georeferenced video search 1-10. [Crossref]
18. Nicolas Boccard. 2017. Social Indicators of Wellbeing. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
19. Andrei Marius Vlăducu. Three Social Choice Rules 54-71. [Crossref]
20. Annielli A R Cunha, Danielle C Morais. 2016. Analysing the use of cognitive maps in an experiment
on a group decision process. Journal of the Operational Research Society 67:12, 1459-1468. [Crossref]
21. Erick Moreno-Centeno, Adolfo R. Escobedo. 2016. Axiomatic aggregation of incomplete rankings.
IIE Transactions 48:6, 475-488. [Crossref]

22. Konrad Kułakowski. 2016. Notes on the existence of a solution in the pairwise comparisons method
using the heuristic rating estimation approach. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence 77:1-2,
105-121. [Crossref]
23. Zsolt Katona. 2015. Democracy in product design: Consumer participation and differentiation
strategies. Quantitative Marketing and Economics 13:4, 359-394. [Crossref]
24. Jens Rommel. 2015. What can economic experiments tell us about institutional change in social–
ecological systems?. Environmental Science & Policy 53, 96-104. [Crossref]
25. Olivier Hudry. Voting Procedures, Complexity of 1-35. [Crossref]
26. Sung-Hyuk Cha, Yoo Jung An. Syntatic and Semantic Taxonomy of Preferential Voting Methods
301-315. [Crossref]
27. James Green-Armytage. 2014. Strategic voting and nomination. Social Choice and Welfare 42:1,
111-138. [Crossref]
28. Luca Galli. Matching Game Mechanics and Human Computation Tasks in Games with a Purpose
9-14. [Crossref]
29. Jose Leao e Silva Filho, Suzana De Franca Dantas Daher, Danielle Costa Morais. Using OWDg to
Support a Multicriteria Group Decision in a Logistics Problem 56-61. [Crossref]
30. Suratna Budalakoti, Suzanne Barber. Tournament-Based Reputation Models for Aggregating Relative
Preferences 983-986. [Crossref]
31. Rafal Doroz, Piotr Porwik, Krzysztof Wrobel. Signature Recognition Based on Voting Schemes 53-57.
[Crossref]
32. João Erick de Mattos Fernandes, Luiz Flávio Autran Monteiro Gomes, João Carlos Correia Baptista
Soares de Mello, Silvio Figueiredo Gomes Júnior. 2013. Seleção de uma aeronave para atividades
de charter regional com utilização do método multicritério de borda modificado com utilização de
mediana. Journal of Transport Literature 7:2, 171-191. [Crossref]
33. José Luis García-Lapresta, Miguel Martínez-Panero. Duplication in OWA-Generated Positional
Aggregation Rules 117-128. [Crossref]
34. Michael Yu, Tomás Lejarraga, Cleotilde Gonzalez. 2012. Context-Specific, Scenario-Based Risk
Scales. Risk Analysis 32:12, 2166-2181. [Crossref]
35. Sergiu Gherghina, George Jiglau. 2012. WHERE DOES THE MECHANISM COLLAPSE?
UNDERSTANDING THE 2008 ROMANIAN ELECTORAL SYSTEM. Representation 48:4,
445-459. [Crossref]
36. Leigh Hargreaves, Sarah John. 2012. Modelling Ordinal Electoral Systems: The Uniqueness of South
Australian Legislative Elections. Australian Journal of Political Science 47:2, 273-283. [Crossref]
37. Olivier Hudry. Voting Procedures, Complexity of 3291-3314. [Crossref]
38. Danielle C. Morais, Adiel Teixeira de Almeida. 2012. Group decision making on water resources based
on analysis of individual rankings. Omega 40:1, 42-52. [Crossref]
39. Gwendolyn Kolfschoten. 2012. A toolbox for democratic and participatory methods in education.
Future Learning 1:1, 3-19. [Crossref]
40. Markus Schulze. 2011. A new monotonic, clone-independent, reversal symmetric, and condorcetconsistent single-winner election method. Social Choice and Welfare 36:2, 267-303. [Crossref]
41. William V. Gehrlein, Dominique Lepelley. Other Characteristics of Voting Rules 249-294. [Crossref]
42. Allen Van Gelder. Careful Ranking of Multiple Solvers with Timeouts and Ties 317-328. [Crossref]
43. Nadja Betzler, Arkadii Slinko, Johannes Uhlmann. 2011. On the Computation of Fully Proportional
Representation. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]

44. James L. Swofford, Franklin G. Mixon, Trellis G. Green. 2009. Can a sub-optimal tournament
be optimal when the prize can be collectively consumed? The case of college football's national
championship. Applied Economics 41:25, 3215-3223. [Crossref]
45. DMITRY RYVKIN. 2009. Tournaments of Weakly Heterogeneous Players. Journal of Public
Economic Theory 11:5, 819-855. [Crossref]
46. Lowell Bruce Anderson, Helena Dandurova, James E. Falk, Lana Yeganova. 2009. Relationships
between Borda voting and Zermelo ranking. Social Choice and Welfare 32:3, 355-365. [Crossref]
47. Michel Truchon, Stephen Gordon. 2009. Statistical comparison of aggregation rules for votes.
Mathematical Social Sciences 57:2, 199-212. [Crossref]
48. Joachim Weimann. DELEGATIONSPROBLEME IN REPRÄSENTATIVEN DEMOKRATIEN
439-451. [Crossref]
49. Peter Bodo. The Effects of Noise and Manipulation on the Accuracy of Collective Decision Rules
62-73. [Crossref]
50. Jose Apesteguia, Miguel A. Ballester, Rosa Ferrer. 2009. On the Justice of Decision Rules. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
51. Glenn W. Harrison, Tanga McDaniel. 2008. Voting games and computational complexity. Oxford
Economic Papers 60:3, 546-565. [Crossref]
52. Dmitry Ryvkin, Andreas Ortmann. 2008. The Predictive Power of Three Prominent Tournament
Formats. Management Science 54:3, 492-504. [Crossref]
53. Gheorghe Silaghi, Luis Silva, Patricio Domingues, Alvaro E. Arenas. Tackling the Collusion Threat
in P2P-enhanced Internet Desktop Grids 393-402. [Crossref]
54. Philip N. Howard. 2008. In the Margins: Recounts, Victory and Error in the 2000 and 2004 U.S.
Elections. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
55. Chih-Chien Wang, Yann-Jy Yang. 2007. Condorcet criterion to support consumer decision making
for online shopping. Journal of Statistics and Management Systems 10:3, 377-393. [Crossref]
56. Anne Etienne. 2007. Do Election Results Represent People's Political Ideologies? A Study of the
French 2002 Presidential Elections. French Politics 5:1, 20-32. [Crossref]
57. Pierre Favardin, Dominique Lepelley. 2006. Some Further Results on the Manipulability of Social
Choice Rules. Social Choice and Welfare 26:3, 485-509. [Crossref]
58. Lori Wilkinson, Tracey Peter, Renuka Chaturvedi. 2006. The short-term, medium-term, and longterm economic performance of immigrant women in Canada and the United States. Journal of
International Migration and Integration / Revue de l'integration et de la migration internationale 7:2,
195-217. [Crossref]
59. Joachim Weimann. Kollektive Entscheidungen 155-228. [Crossref]
60. Joachim Weimann. Delegations-probleme in ReprÄsentativen Demokratien 409-436. [Crossref]
61. Dan Alger. 2006. Voting by proxy. Public Choice 126:1-2, 1-26. [Crossref]
62. Dmitry Ryvkin, Andreas Ortmann. 2006. Three Prominent Tournament Formats: Predictive Power
and Costs. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
63. Chris Geller. 2005. Single transferable vote with Borda elimination: proportional representation,
moderation, quasi-chaos and stability. Electoral Studies 24:2, 265-280. [Crossref]
64. Claude Hillinger. 2005. The Case for Utilitarian Voting. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
65. A. L. Nagar, Sudip Ranjan Basu. 2004. Statistical Properties of a Composite Index as Estimator of a
Single Latent Variable. Journal of Quantitative Economics 2:2, 19-27. [Crossref]
66. Amrita Dhillon, Ben Lockwood. 2004. When are plurality rule voting games dominance-solvable?.
Games and Economic Behavior 46:1, 55-75. [Crossref]

67. Michel Truchon. 2004. Aggregation of Rankings in Figure Skating. SSRN Electronic Journal .
[Crossref]
68. Claude Hillinger. 2004. On the Possibility of Democracy and Rational Collective Choice. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
69. Gerry Mackie. Democracy Defended 20, . [Crossref]
70. Kelly D. Edmiston. 2002. Fostering subnational autonomy and accountability in decentralized
developing countries: lessons from the Papua New Guinea experience. Public Administration and
Development 22:3, 221-234. [Crossref]
71. Steven J. Brams, Peter C. Fishburn. Chapter 4 Voting procedures 173-236. [Crossref]
72. Amartya Sen. 1999. The Possibility of Social Choice. American Economic Review 89:3, 349-378.
[Citation] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
73. Mustafa R Yilmaz. 1999. Can we improve upon approval voting?. European Journal of Political Economy
15:1, 89-100. [Crossref]
74. Ewald Nowotny. Entscheidungstheoretische Grundlagen — Wohlfahrtsökonomie und Public Choice
Theorie 63-87. [Crossref]
75. Michel Truchon. 1999. La démocratie : oui, mais laquelle?. L'Actualité économique 75:1-2-3, 189-214.
[Crossref]
76. Walter W. McMahon. 1998. Conceptual Framework for the Analysis of the Social Benefits of Lifelong
Learnings. Education Economics 6:3, 309-346. [Crossref]
77. Michel Le Breton, Michel Truchon. 1997. A Borda measure for social choice functions. Mathematical
Social Sciences 34:3, 249-272. [Crossref]
78. Joachim Weimann. Kollektive Entscheidungen 150-228. [Crossref]
79. Ewald Nowotny. Entscheidungstheoretische Grundlagen — Wohlfahrtsökonomie und Public Choice
Theorie 64-89. [Crossref]
80. . Entscheidungstheoretische Grundlagen – Wohlfahrtsökonomie und Public Choice Theorie 83-115.
[Crossref]

