Proceedings of the Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media

Measuring User Inﬂuence in Twitter: The Million Follower Fallacy
Meeyoung Cha∗

Hamed Haddadi†
∗
†

Fabrı́cio Benevenuto‡

Krishna P. Gummadi∗

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), Germany
Royal Veterinary College, University of London, United Kingdom
‡
CS Dept., Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil

a minority of users, called inﬂuentials, excel in persuading
others (Rogers 1962). This theory predicts that by targeting these inﬂuentials in the network, one may achieve a
large-scale chain-reaction of inﬂuence driven by word-ofmouth, with a very small marketing cost (Katz and Lazarsfeld 1955). A more modern view, in contrast, de-emphasizes
the role of inﬂuentials. Instead, it posits that the key factors determining inﬂuence are (i) the interpersonal relationship among ordinary users and (ii) the readiness of a
society to adopt an innovation (Watts and Dodds 2007;
Domingos and Richardson 2001). This modern view of inﬂuence leads to marketing strategies such as collaborative
ﬁltering. These theories, however, are still just theories, because there has been a lack of empirical data that could be
used to validate either of them. The recent advent of social
networking sites and the data within such sites now allow
researchers to empirically validate these theories.
Moving from theory into practice, we ﬁnd that there are
many other unanswered questions about how inﬂuence diffuses through a population and whether it varies across topics and time. People have different levels of expertise on
various subjects. When it comes to marketing, however, this
fact is generally ignored. Marketing services actively search
for potential inﬂuencers to promote various items. These
inﬂuencers range from “cool” teenagers, local opinion leaders, all the way to popular public ﬁgures. However, the advertised items are often far outside the domain of expertise
of these hired individuals. So how effective are these marketing strategies? Can a person’s inﬂuence in one area be
transferred to other areas?
In this paper, we present an empirical analysis of inﬂuence patterns in a popular social medium. Using a large
amount of data gathered from Twitter, we compare three different measures of inﬂuence: indegree, retweets, and mentions.1 Focusing on different topics, we examine how the
three types of inﬂuential users performed in spreading popular news topics. We also investigate the dynamics of an
individual’s inﬂuence by topic and over time. Finally, we
characterize the precise behaviors that make ordinary individuals gain high inﬂuence over a short period of time.

Abstract
Directed links in social media could represent anything
from intimate friendships to common interests, or even
a passion for breaking news or celebrity gossip. Such
directed links determine the ﬂow of information and
hence indicate a user’s inﬂuence on others—a concept
that is crucial in sociology and viral marketing. In this
paper, using a large amount of data collected from Twitter, we present an in-depth comparison of three measures of inﬂuence: indegree, retweets, and mentions.
Based on these measures, we investigate the dynamics of user inﬂuence across topics and time. We make
several interesting observations. First, popular users
who have high indegree are not necessarily inﬂuential
in terms of spawning retweets or mentions. Second,
most inﬂuential users can hold signiﬁcant inﬂuence over
a variety of topics. Third, inﬂuence is not gained spontaneously or accidentally, but through concerted effort
such as limiting tweets to a single topic. We believe that
these ﬁndings provide new insights for viral marketing
and suggest that topological measures such as indegree
alone reveals very little about the inﬂuence of a user.

Introduction
Inﬂuence has long been studied in the ﬁelds of sociology,
communication, marketing, and political science (Rogers
1962; Katz and Lazarsfeld 1955). The notion of inﬂuence
plays a vital role in how businesses operate and how a society functions—for instance, see observations on how fashion
spreads (Gladwell 2002) and how people vote (Berry and
Keller 2003). Studying inﬂuence patterns can help us better understand why certain trends or innovations are adopted
faster than others and how we could help advertisers and
marketers design more effective campaigns. Studying inﬂuence patterns, however, has been difﬁcult. This is because
such a study does not lend itself to readily available quantiﬁcation, and essential components like human choices and
the ways our societies function cannot be reproduced within
the conﬁnes of the lab.
Nevertheless, there have been important theoretical studies on the diffusion of inﬂuence, albeit with radically different results. Traditional communication theory states that

1

Indegree is the number of people who follow a user; retweets
mean the number of times others “forward” a user’s tweet; and
mentions mean the number of times others mention a user’s name.

c 2010, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10

The Twitter dataset used in this paper consists of 2 billion
follow links among 54 million users who produced a total of
1.7 billion tweets. We refer readers to our project webpage
http://twitter.mpi-sws.org/ for a detailed description of the
dataset and our data sharing plan.
Our study provides several ﬁndings that have direct implications in the design of social media and viral marketing:

In contrast, a more modern view of information ﬂow emphasizes the importance of prevailing culture more than the
role of inﬂuentials. Some researchers have reasoned that
people in the new information age make choices based on
the opinions of their peers and friends, rather than by inﬂuentials (Domingos and Richardson 2001). These researchers
argued that direct marketing through inﬂuentials would not
be as proﬁtable as using “network”-based advertising such
as collaborative ﬁltering.
The traditional inﬂuentials theory has also been criticized
because its information ﬂow process does not take into account the role of ordinary users. In order to compare the
role of inﬂuentials and ordinary users, researchers have developed a series of simulations, in which information ﬂows
freely between users, and a user adopts an innovation when
he is inﬂuenced by more than a threshold of the sample population (Watts and Dodds 2007). Inﬂuentials were deﬁned
as those in the top 10% of inﬂuence distribution. The simulation showed that inﬂuentials initiated more frequent and
larger cascades than average users, but they were neither
necessary nor sufﬁcient for all diffusions, as suggested in
the traditional theory. Moreover, in homogeneous networks,
inﬂuentials were no more successful in running long cascades than ordinary users. This means that a trend’s success
depends not on the person who starts it, but on how susceptible the society is overall to the trend (Watts 2007). In fact,
a trend can be initiated by any one, and if the environment is
right, it will spread. Therefore, Watts dubbed early adopters
or opinion leaders “accidental” inﬂuentials.
The above competing ideas have remained as hypotheses
for several reasons. First is the lack of data that could be
used to empirically test them. Although there exist a handful
of empirical studies on word-of-mouth inﬂuence (Leskovec,
Adamic, and Huberman 2007; Cha, Mislove, and Gummadi
2009), no work has been conducted on the relative order
of inﬂuence among individuals. A second issue is the variety of ways that inﬂuence has been deﬁned (Watts 2007;
Goyal, Bonchi, and Lakshmanan 2010). It has been unclear
what exactly inﬂuence means. Finally, decades have passed
since the inﬂuentials theory appeared. Even if the theory
was reasonably accurate when it was proposed, things have
changed and now we have much more variability in the ﬂow
of inﬂuence. In particular, online communities have become
a signiﬁcant way we receive new information and inﬂuence
in such communities needs to be explored. In this paper, we
investigate the notion of inﬂuence using a large amount of
data collected from a popular social medium, Twitter.

1) Analysis of the three inﬂuence measures provides a better
understanding of the different roles users play in social
media. Indegree represents popularity of a user; retweets
represent the content value of one’s tweets; and mentions
represent the name value of a user. Hence, the top users
based on the three measures have little overlap.
2) Our ﬁnding on how inﬂuence varies across topics could
serve as a useful test for answering how effective advertisement in Twitter would be if one is to employ inﬂuential
users. Our analysis shows that most inﬂuential users hold
signiﬁcant inﬂuence over a variety of topics.
3) Ordinary users can gain inﬂuence by focusing on a single topic and posting creative and insightful tweets that
are perceived as valuable by others, as opposed to simply
conversing with others.
These ﬁndings provide new insights for viral marketing.
The ﬁrst ﬁnding in particular indicates that indegree alone
reveals little about the inﬂuence of a user. This has been
coined the million follower fallacy by Avnit (Avnit 2009),
who pointed to anecdotal evidence that some users follow
others simply for etiquette—it’s polite to follow someone
who’s following you—and many do not read all the broadcast tweets. We have empirically demonstrated that having a
million followers does not always mean much in the Twitter
world. Instead, we claim that it is more inﬂuential to have
an active audience who retweets or mentions the user.

Deﬁning inﬂuence on Twitter
We start by reviewing studies of diffusion of inﬂuence and
related work on inﬂuence propagation on Twitter.

Background
There are a number of conﬂicting ideas and theories about
how trends and innovations get adopted and spread.
The traditional view assumes that a minority of members in a society possess qualities that make them exceptionally persuasive in spreading ideas to others. These exceptional individuals drive trends on behalf of the majority of ordinary people. They are loosely described as being informed, respected, and well-connected; they are called
the opinion leaders in the two-step ﬂow theory (Katz and
Lazarsfeld 1955), innovators in the diffusion of innovations
theory (Rogers 1962), and hubs, connectors, or mavens in
other work (Gladwell 2002). The theory of inﬂuentials is
intuitive and compelling. By identifying and convincing a
small number of inﬂuential individuals, a viral campaign can
reach a wide audience at a small cost. The theory spread well
beyond academia and has been adopted in many marketing
businesses, e.g., RoperASW and Tremor (Gladwell 2002;
Berry and Keller 2003).

Measuring inﬂuence on Twitter
The Merriam-Webster dictionary deﬁnes inﬂuence as “the
power or capacity of causing an effect in indirect or intangible ways.” Despite the large number of theories of inﬂuence in sociology, there is no tangible way to measure such
a force nor is there a concrete deﬁnition of what inﬂuence
means, for instance, in the spread of news.
In this paper, we analyze the Twitter network as a news
spreading medium and study the types and degrees of inﬂuence within the network. Focusing on an individual’s potential to lead others to engage in a certain act, we highlight

11

three “interpersonal” activities on Twitter. First, users interact by following updates of people who post interesting
tweets. Second, users can pass along interesting pieces of
information to their followers. This act is popularly known
as retweeting and can typically be identiﬁed by the use
of RT @username or via @username in tweets. Finally, users can respond to (or comment on) other people’s
tweets, which we call mentioning. Mentioning is identiﬁed
by searching for @username in the tweet content, after excluding retweets. A tweet that starts with @username is
not broadcast to all followers, but only to the replied user. A
tweet containing @username in the middle of its text gets
broadcast to all followers. These three activities represent
the different types of inﬂuence of a person:

us to gather large amounts of data. We used the Twitter API
to gather information about a user’s social links and tweets.
We launched our crawler in August 2009 for all user IDs
ranging from 0 to 80 million. We did not look beyond 80
million, because no single user in the collected data had a
link to a user whose ID was greater than that value. Out of 80
million possible IDs, we found 54,981,152 in-use accounts,
which were connected to each other by 1,963,263,821 social
links. We gathered information about a user’s follow links
and all tweets ever posted by each user since the early days
of the service. In total, there were 1,755,925,520 tweets.
Nearly 8% of all user accounts were set private, so that only
their friends could view their tweets. We ignore these users
in our analysis. The social link information is based on the
ﬁnal snapshot of the network topology at the time of crawling and we do not know when the links were formed.
The network of Twitter users comprises a single disproportionately large connected component (containing 94.8%
of users), singletons (5%), and smaller components (0.2%).
The largest component contains 99% of all links and tweets.
Our goal is to explore inﬂuence of users, hence we focus on
the largest component of the network, which is conceptually
a single interaction domain for users.
Because it is hard to determine inﬂuence of users who
have few tweets, we borrowed the concept of “active users”
from the traditional media research (Levy and Windhal
1985) and focused on those users with some minimum level
of activity. We ignored users who had posted fewer than 10
tweets during their entire lifetime. We also ignored users
for whom we did not have a valid screen name, because this
information is crucial in identifying the number of times a
user was mentioned or retweeted by others. After ﬁltering,
there were 6,189,636 users, whom we focus on in the remainder of this paper. To measure the inﬂuence of these 6
million users, however, we looked into how the entire set of
52 million users interacted with these active users.

1. Indegree inﬂuence, the number of followers of a user,
directly indicates the size of the audience for that user.
2. Retweet inﬂuence, which we measure through the number of retweets containing one’s name, indicates the ability of that user to generate content with pass-along value.
3. Mention inﬂuence, which we measure through the number of mentions containing one’s name, indicates the ability of that user to engage others in a conversation.

Related work on Twitter
Several recent efforts have been made to track inﬂuence
on Twitter. The Web Ecology Project tracked 12 popular Twitter users for a 10-day period and grouped a user’s
inﬂuence into two types: conversation-based and contentbased (Leavitt et al. 2009). This work concluded that news
media are better at spreading content, while celebrities are
better at simply making conversation. Our work extends
their notion of inﬂuence and uses extensive data to further
examine the spatial and temporal dynamics of inﬂuence.
More recently, a PageRank-like measure has been proposed to quantify inﬂuence on Twitter (Weng et al. 2010).
The authors found high link reciprocity (72%) from a nonrandom sample of 6,748 Singapore-based users, and argued
that high reciprocity is indicative of homophily. They then
exploited this fact in computing a user’ inﬂuence rank. Our
study, however, contradicts the observation about high reciprocity; near-complete data of Twitter shows low reciprocity
(10%). Thus, we predict that social links on Twitter represent an inﬂuence relationship, rather than homophily. Accordingly, we ask what are the different activities on Twitter
that represent inﬂuence of a user and to what extent a person’s inﬂuence varies across tweet topic and time.

Methodology for comparing user inﬂuence
For each of the 6 million users, we computed the value of
each inﬂuence measure and compared them. Rather than
comparing the values directly, we used the relative order of
users’ ranks as a measure of difference. In order to do this,
we sorted users by each measure, so that the rank of 1 indicates the most inﬂuential user and increasing rank indicates a less inﬂuential user. Users with the same inﬂuence
value receive the average of the rank amongst them (Buck
1980). Once every user is assigned a rank for each inﬂuence
measure, we are ready to quantify how a user’s rank varies
across different measures and examine what kinds of users
are ranked high for a given measure.
We used Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient

6 (xi − yi )2
(1)
ρ=1−
N3 − N
as a measure of the strength of the association between two
rank sets, where xi and yi are the ranks of users based on
two different inﬂuence measures in a dataset of N users.
Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient calculation is a nonparametric test; the coefﬁcient assesses how well an arbi-

Characteristics of the top inﬂuentials
We describe how we collected the Twitter data and present
the characteristics of the top users based on three inﬂuence
measures: indegree, retweets, and mentions.

Dataset
We asked Twitter administrators to allow us to gather data
from their site at scale. They graciously white-listed the IP
address range containing 58 of our servers, which allowed

12

trary monotonic function could describe the relationship between two variables, without making any other assumptions
about the particular nature of the relationship between the
variables. Our inclusive and complete dataset guarantees reliability of the correlation estimates. The closer ρ is to +1
or −1, the stronger the likely correlation. A perfect positive
correlation is +1 and a perfect negative correlation is −1.









Comparing three measures of user inﬂuence



To see what kinds of users are the most inﬂuential, we visited
the Twitter pages of the top-20 users based on each measure.






 

Figure 1: Venn diagram of the top-100 inﬂuentials across
measures: The chart is normalized so that the total is 100%.

The top inﬂuentials The most followed users span a wide
variety of public ﬁgures and news sources. They were
news sources (CNN, New York Times), politicians (Barack
Obama), athletes (Shaquille O’Neal), as well as celebrities
like actors, writers, musicians, and models (Ashton Kutcher,
Britney Spears). As the list suggests, indegree measure is
useful when we want to identify users who get lots of attention from their audience through one-on-one interactions,
i.e., the audience is directly connected to inﬂuentials.
The most retweeted users were content aggregation services (Mashable, TwitterTips, TweetMeme), businessmen
(Guy Kawasaki), and news sites (The New York Times, The
Onion). They are trackers of trending topic and knowledgeable people in different ﬁelds, whom other users decide to
retweet. Unlike indegree, retweets represent inﬂuence of a
user beyond one’s one-to-one interaction domain; popular
tweets could propagate multiple hops away from the source
before they are retweeted throughout the network. Furthermore, because of the tight connection between users as suggested in the triadic closure (Granovetter 1973), retweeting
in a social network can serve as a powerful tool to reinforce
a message—for instance, the probability of adopting an innovation increases when not one but a group of users repeat
the same message (Watts and Dodds 2007).
The most mentioned users were mostly celebrities. Ordinary users showed a great passion for celebrities, regularly
posting messages to them or mentioning them, without necessarily retweeting their posts. This indicates that celebrities
are often in the center of public attention and celebrity gossip is a popular activity among Twitter users.
If retweets represent a citation of another user’s content, mentions represent a public response to another user’s
tweet—the focus of a tweet is on content for retweets, while
the focus is on the replied user for mentions. This can be
conﬁrmed from the usage of conventions in tweets: 92% of
tweets that had a RT or via marker contained a URL and
97% of them also contained the @username ﬁeld. This
means that retweets are about the content (indicated by the
embedded URL) and that people typically cite the authentic source when they retweet. However, fewer than 30% of
tweets that were classiﬁed as mentions contained any URL,
indicating that a mention is more identity-driven.
Across all three measures, the top inﬂuentials were generally recognizable public ﬁgures and websites. Interestingly,
we saw marginal overlap in these three top lists. These top20 lists only had 2 users in common: Ashton Kutcher and
Puff Daddy. The top-100 lists also showed marginal over-





lap, as shown in Figure 1, indicating that the three measures
capture different types of inﬂuence.
Relative inﬂuence ranks In order to investigate how the
three measures correlate, we compared the relative inﬂuence
ranks of all 6 million users (Table 1). We see a moderately
high correlation (above 0.5) across all pairs. However, the
high correlation appears to be an artifact of the tied ranks
among the least inﬂuential users, e.g., many of the least connected users also received zero retweet and mention. To
avoid this bias, we focused on the set of relatively popular users. We considered users in the top 10th and 1st percentiles based on indegree, in the hope that users who get
retweeted or mentioned must have some followers.
Table 1: Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcients
Correlation
All
Top 10% Top 1%
Indegree vs retweets
0.549
0.122
0.109
Indegree vs mentions 0.638
0.286
0.309
Retweets vs mentions 0.580
0.638
0.605
After this ﬁltering step, the top users showed a strong
correlation in their retweet inﬂuence and mention inﬂuence.
Sampling the top users based on retweets or mentions leads
to similar results. This means that, in general, users who get
mentioned often also get retweeted often, and vice versa. Indegree, however, was not related to the other measures. We
conclude that the most connected users are not necessarily
the most inﬂuential when it comes to engaging one’s audience in conversations and having one’s messages spread.
Discussion of methodology Normalizing retweets and
mentions by total tweets would yield a different measure
of inﬂuence, which might have led to very different results.
When we tried normalizing the data, we identiﬁed local
opinion leaders as the most inﬂuential. However, normalization failed to rank users with the highest sheer number of
retweets as inﬂuential. Therefore, in this paper, we use the
sheer number of retweets and mentions without normalizing
these values by the total tweets of a user.
Other measures such as the number of tweets and outdegree (i.e., the number of people a user follows) were not
found to be useful, because they identiﬁed robots and spammers as the most inﬂuential, respectively. Therefore, we do
not use these measures.

13

Topic
Iran
Swine
Jackson

Table 2: Summary information of the three major topics events studied
Period
Keywords
Users
Tweets
Jun 11—Aug 10 #iranelection, names of politicians 302,130
1,482,038
May 3—July 2
Mexico ﬂu, H1N1, swine
239,329
495,825
Jun 25—Aug 24 Michael Jackson, #mj
610,213
1,418,356

Finally, we calculated indegree based on the snapshot of
the network at the time of crawling in 2009, because we
do not know the time when each follow link was formed.
For the calculation of retweets and mentions, however, we
used longitudinal data (i.e., since the beginning of the Twitter service in 2006). This difference could have resulted in
a weaker correlation between indegree and the other inﬂuence measures (Table 1). Nevertheless, nearly three quarters
of Twitter users joined in 2009, suggesting that the effect on
the correlation would have been minimal.

Audience
22,177,836
20,977,793
23,550,211

from diverse genres. These properties make this group ideal
for studying how a user’s inﬂuence varies across vastly different topic genres.

Distribution of the inﬂuence ranks
To get a measure of inﬂuence for a given topic, we count
only the retweets and mentions a user spawned on the given
topic. Because indegree is invariant across topics, we do not
use the measure in this analysis.
Before investigating the dynamics of inﬂuence across topics, we ﬁrst need to understand the high-level characteristics of user inﬂuence, such as the degree to which users’
inﬂuence can differ. Figure 2 displays the inﬂuence ranks
of users based on retweets and mentions across the Iran,
Swine, and Jackson topics. The inﬂuence ranks are calculated for each topic and a user’s rank may differ for different
topics. The plots show a straight line on a log-log plot, a
property that is referred to as the power-law characteristic.
The power-law pattern is indicative of the fact that users’
degree of inﬂuence can differ by orders of magnitude: the
top inﬂuentials were retweeted or mentioned disproportionately more times than the majority of users. This suggests
that utilizing top inﬂuentials has a great potential payoff in
marketing strategy.

Does inﬂuence hold across different topics?
Having deﬁned three different measures of inﬂuence on
Twitter, we now investigate whether a user’s inﬂuence varies
by topic genres. In order to investigate this, we ﬁrst need to
ﬁnd users who tweeted about a diverse set of topics.

Methodology for identifying target topics
To ﬁnd as many users to monitor as possible, we picked three
of the most popular topics in 2009 that were considered engaging and revolutionary in Twitter2 : the Iranian presidential election, the outbreak of the H1N1 inﬂuenza, and the
death of Michael Jackson. While all three topics were popular, they span political, health, and social genres. To extract
tweets relevant to these events, we ﬁrst identiﬁed the set of
keywords describing the topics by consulting news websites
and informed individuals. Using the selected keywords, we
then identiﬁed relevant tweets by searching for the keywords
in the tweet dataset.
Table 2 displays the keywords and the total number of
users and tweets for each topic. We focused on a period of
60 days starting from one day prior to the start of each event.
We limited the study duration because popular keywords
were typically hijacked by spammers after certain time. The
table also shows the total number of users who received any
tweet on the topic (termed audience). Each topic reached
an audience of over 20 million, indicating that over 40% of
users in Twitter were aware of at least one of the three topics.
Among the users who tweeted about any of these topics,
fewer than 2% discussed all three topics. Although 2% is a
small fraction, this set contains 13,219 users, which is a large
enough sample size for statistical analysis. These users were
generally well connected; they had on average 2,037 followers, and together reached an audience of 16 million. Furthermore, none of these users were dedicated to these three
topics; no user had dedicated more than 60% of their tweets
to these topics. This means that the set of 13,219 users is
enthusiastic about sharing thoughts on popular news topics

Number of retweets

10000
Iran
Swine
Jackson

1000
100
10
1
0
1

10

100
1000
User ranks

10000

Number of ment ons

(a) Retweet inﬂuence ranks
1000
Iran
Swine
Jackson

100
10
1
0
1

10

100
1000
User ranks

10000

(b) Mention inﬂuence ranks

2

The top Twitter trends identiﬁed by the Twitter Research team
are listed at http://tinyurl.com/yb4965e.

Figure 2: Distribution of user ranks for a given topic

14

Ranks (Sw ne, Jackson)

Variation of a user’s inﬂuence across topics
Next, in order to examine how volatile a user’s rank is across
different topics, we compare the relative order of inﬂuence
ranks across topics in Table 3. For the same reason we previously discussed in Table 1, we ignore the least popular users
who have tied ranks and focus on the set of relatively popular users, as measured by indegree. The top 10th and 1st
percentiles included 1,322 and 132 users, respectively.

100

Swine
Jackson

80
60
40
20
0
0

Table 3: Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcients over topics
Retweet
Mentions
Topics
Top 10% 1% Top 10% 1%
Iran vs. Swine
0.54
0.62
0.59
0.68
Iran vs. Jackson
0.48
0.54
0.59
0.63
Swine vs. Jackson
0.55
0.50
0.80
0.68

5

10

15

20

Ranks (Iran)

Figure 3: Users’ retweet inﬂuence ranks over topics

The rise and fall of inﬂuentials over time
Many factors—social, political, and economical—affect
popularity and inﬂuence of individuals and organizations. In
online social media, such dynamics is facilitated by easy entry of competition. It only costs 140 characters to generate
a tweet for any user. Likewise, it will be challenging for inﬂuentials to maintain their status when many emerging local
opinion leaders and evangelists enter the arena.
Here we analyze the dynamics of individual’s inﬂuence
over time in two ways. First, we track the popularity of top
inﬂuentials over a long term period and check how well they
maintain their ranks. Second, we focus on users who increased their inﬂuence in a speciﬁc topic over a short time
period, in order to understand what behaviors make ordinary
individuals inﬂuential.

The rank correlation is generally high (above 0.5) and gets
stronger for the top 1% of users. Mentions show an even
stronger correlation across topics than retweets. This means
that a popular user who is good at spawning mentions from
others can do so over a wide range of topics, more easily
than when she is retweeted over diverse topics. Among topic
pairs, Swine and Jackson showed the highest correlation for
the top 10% of well-connected users for both the retweet and
mention inﬂuence. This is perhaps due to the more social
nature of these two events, which differs from the Iran topic
where special interest groups like politicians and bloggers
played a major role.
Given that the rank correlation gets stronger for users with
high indegree, we investigated how widely the ranks of the
top listed users change by topic. Figure 3 shows the retweet
ranks of the top users in the Iran topic against the relative
retweet ranks of the same users in the Swine and Jackson
topics. It is clear from the ﬁgure that the top 5 users in
the Iran topic retained their relative ranks in the other two
topics. These users were Mashable, CnnBrk, TweetMeme,
Time, and BreakingNews, who were all in the category of
authoritative news sources and content trackers. The mention inﬂuence also showed a similar trend (not shown here);
most inﬂuentials ranked consistently high amongst different
topics. And we have observed this trend not only for the
hyper-inﬂuentials: moderate inﬂuentials like opinion leaders and evangelists also had consistent inﬂuence ranks over
diverse topics, as shown in Table 3.
Our ﬁndings about the highly skewed ability of users to
inﬂuence others (Figure 2) and the strong correlation in a
user’s inﬂuence rank across different topics (Table 3) together lead to two interesting conclusions. First, most inﬂuential users hold signiﬁcant inﬂuence over a variety of topics. This means that local opinion leaders and highly popular
ﬁgures could indeed be used to spread information outside
their area of expertise. In fact, new advertisement campaigns
have recently been launched that insert advertisement links
into a popular person’s tweet (Fiorillo 2009). Second, the
power-law trend in the difference among inﬂuence of individuals indicates that it is substantially more effective to target the top inﬂuentials than to employ a massive number of
non-popular users in order to kick start a viral campaign.

Maintaining engagement of the top inﬂuentials
Out of all 6 million active users in the Twitter network, we
picked the top 100 users based on each of the three measures: indegree, retweets, and mentions. We used all the
tweets ever posted on Twitter in identifying these inﬂuentials. Due to the overlap we discussed in Figure 1, there
were 233 distinct users, whom we call all-time inﬂuentials.
In order to see how the inﬂuence of these all-time inﬂuentials varied over time, we tracked their inﬂuence scores over
an 8 month period from January to August 2009.
To get a time-varying measure of inﬂuence, we counted
the number of retweets and mentions the all-time inﬂuentials spawned in every 15 days over the 8 month period.
Because we only know the indegree information based on
the ﬁnal snapshot of the Twitter network, we do not use this
measure. For each user, we computed a single explanatory
variable P: the probability that a random tweet posted on
Twitter during a 15 day period is a retweet (or a mention) of
that user. Normalizing by the total number of tweets posted
on Twitter is essential to cancel out any variable effect on the
data and allows the underlying characteristics of the data sets
to be compared. For instance, because the Twitter network
quadrupled over time in terms of the registered users, the total volume of tweets merely increased over time. Hence, if
we didn’t normalize the results, the trend wouldn’t be interesting. Google similarly normalizes the data when analyzing
their search trends (Ginsberg et al. 2009).
Figure 4 displays the time evolution of the normalized
retweets and mentions of the 233 all-time inﬂuential users.

15

0.004
Mention probability P

Retweet probability P

0.0015
Top 10 users
Top 11 100
Top 101 233

0.0012
0.0009
0.0006
0.0003
0

Top 10 users
Top 11 100
Top 101 233

0.003
0.002
0.001
0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Time (year 2009)

Time (year 2009)

(a) Retweet inﬂuence

(b) Mention inﬂuence

Jun

Jul

Aug

Figure 4: The temporal evolution of retweets and mentions for the all-time inﬂuential users. For each data point, the error bars
are centered on the average retweet (or mention) probability, and they extend up and down by two standard deviations.
Although the values of P appear small, they account for
a large volume of retweets and mentions: a single most
popular inﬂuential user spawned up to 20,000 retweets and
50,000 mentions over a random 15 day period. In order to
capture the trend in more detail, we classiﬁed the inﬂuentials into three groups based on indegree: the top 10 users,
who were mostly the mainstream news sources; the next 90
users, who were mainly celebrities; and the rest, who were a
mixed group of public ﬁgures and opinion leaders that competed with the traditional mass media.
The evolution of the retweet probability in Figure 4(a)
shows that all three groups mildly increased their inﬂuence
over time. Large error ranges for the top 10 users indicate a
much wider variability in the popularity of this group. The
growth, however, is marginal for all three groups. We conjecture that the marginal increase is due to the limited number of tweets users post a day. Broadcasting too many tweets
puts even popular users at a risk of being classiﬁed as spammers. Hence, Twitter users should moderate the number of
broadcast tweets in order to avoid crossing their followers’
information processing limit.
The evolution of the mention probability in Figure 4(b)
shows distinct patterns for the three groups. The top 10
users fell in popularity over time; the next group had consistent inﬂuence scores over time; and the last group (the least
connected among the three) increased their popularity over
time. Users in the last group, surprisingly, spawned on average more mentions than the top 100 users. While this trend
is counter-intuitive at ﬁrst, the differences between mentions
and retweets can explain the trend.
The mainstream news organizations in the ﬁrst group are
retweeted the most, but they are not mentioned the most.
This is because their names come up mostly when their content get retweeted; it is hard for media sources to engage
users with their identities alone. The second group, comprised of celebrities, is more often mentioned than retweeted
because of their name value. Their tweets also get retweeted,
when inﬂuence is transferred across topics (Table 3). Evangelists in the last group successfully increased their inﬂuence. While many factors could explain this phenomenon,
our manual inspection revealed that these users put signiﬁ-

cant efforts in conversing with others (e.g., replying to their
audience). In a sense, they need self-advertisement the most,
because mass media and celebrities have many other on- and
off-line channels of to promote themselves.
While our ﬁndings provide an interesting view of how different groups of people maintain their popularity, we should
also emphasize that our analysis is in retrospect but not
causal. These ﬁndings are based on the set of users who
ultimately became popular. We also mention that all inﬂuentials put efforts in posting creative and interesting tweets,
as shown from the high correlation in their retweet ranks.

Rising inﬂuence of the ordinary users
Finally we examined the users who increased their inﬂuence
over a short time period to understand what behaviors make
ordinary users inﬂuential. We focused on the set of users
who talked about only one news topic, out of the three news
topics in Table 2, and picked the top 20 users for each news
topic based on indegree. We call these users topical inﬂuentials. The topical inﬂuentials included dedicated accounts
like iranbaan, oxfordgirl, and TM Outbreak who suddenly
became popular over the course of the event. These users
were literally unheard-of at the beginning of the news events
and didn’t receive any retweets or mentions prior to the relevant news event. The list also included users like kevinrose
(the founder of digg.com) and 106andpark (BET.com’s music video site) who were already popular on a speciﬁc topic,
and used the news events to extend their popularity.
We tracked the inﬂuence scores of the 60 topical inﬂuentials over the 8 month in 2009. Again, we computed the
variable P as the probability that a random tweet posted in
a 15 day period is a retweet (or a mention) to that user. Figure 5 displays the temporal evolution of inﬂuence for the
topical inﬂuentials. Overall, the inﬂuence scores are much
lower than that of the global inﬂuentials in Figure 4. This is
expected since topical inﬂuentials had 3 to 180 times fewer
followers than the global inﬂuentials.
Inﬂuentials on Swine ﬂu experienced relatively stable inﬂuence scores for both retweets and mentions. This is because no single day involved a catastrophic event due to
Swine ﬂu. Inﬂuentials on the Iran election increased their

16

Mention probability P

Retweet probability P

0.0005
Iran
Jackson
Swine

0.0004
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0

0.0006

Iran
Jackson
Swine

0.0004

0.0002

0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Time (year 2009)

Time (year 2009)

(a) Retweet inﬂuence

(b) Mention inﬂuence

Jun

Jul

Aug

Figure 5: The temporal evolution of retweets and mentions for the topical inﬂuential users

References

retweet inﬂuence substantially during the peak of the election in June and July, but they did not spawn many mentions. Our data shows that these inﬂuentials actively spread
information about protests and controversial news. Inﬂuentials on Michael Jackson experienced a mild increase in their
retweet inﬂuence in June, whereas their mention inﬂuence
surged during the same time period. Our manual inspection
revealed that users who limit their tweets to a single topic
showed the largest increase in their inﬂuence scores.

Avnit, A. 2009. The Million Followers Fallacy, Internet Draft,
Pravda Media. http://tinyurl.com/nshcjg.
Berry, J., and Keller, E. 2003. The Inﬂuentials: One American in
Ten Tells the Other Nine How to Vote, Where to Eat, and What to
Buy. Free Press.
Buck, W. 1980. Tests of Signiﬁcance for Point-Biserial Rank Correlation Coefﬁcients in the Presence of Ties. Biometrical Journal
22(2):153–158.
Cha, M.; Mislove, A.; and Gummadi, K. P. 2009. A MasurementDriven Analysis of Information Propagation in the Flickr Social
Network. In WWW.
Domingos, P., and Richardson, M. 2001. Mining the Network
Value of Customers. In ACM SIGKDD.
Fiorillo, J. 2009. Twitter Advertising: Pay-Per-Tweet, Wikinomics.
http://tinyurl.com/d89uu9.
Ginsberg, J.; Mohebbi, M. H.; Patel, R. S.; Brammer, L.; Smolinski, M. S.; and Brilliant, L. 2009. Detecting Inﬂuenza Epidemics
Using Search Engine Query Data. Nature 457.
Gladwell, M. 2002. The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can
Make a Big Difference. Back Bay Books.
Goyal, A.; Bonchi, F.; and Lakshmanan, L. V. S. 2010. Learning
Inﬂuence Probabilities In Social Networks. In ACM WSDM.
Granovetter, M. 1973. The Strength of Weak Ties. American
Journal of Sociology 78(6).
Katz, E., and Lazarsfeld, P. 1955. Personal Inﬂuence: The Part
Played by People in the Flow of Mass Communications. New York:
The Free Press.
Leavitt, A.; Burchard, E.; Fisher, D.; and Gilbert, S. 2009. The
Inﬂuentials: New Approaches for Analyzing Inﬂuence on Twitter.
Web Ecology Project, http://tinyurl.com/lzjlzq.
Leskovec, J.; Adamic, L. A.; and Huberman, B. A. 2007. The
Dynamics of Viral Marketing. ACM Trans. on the Web (TWEB).
Levy, M., and Windhal, S. 1985. Media Gratications Research,
Chapter The Concept of Audience Activity. Sage.
Rogers, E. M. 1962. Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press.
Watts, D., and Dodds, P. 2007. Inﬂuentials, Networks, and Public
Opinion Formation. Journal of Consumer Research.
Watts, D. 2007. Challenging the Inﬂuentials Hypothesis. Word of
Mouth Marketing Association.
Weng, J.; Lim, E.-P.; Jiang, J.; and He, Q. 2010. TwitterRank:
Finding Topic-Sensitive Inﬂuential Twitterers. In ACM WSDM.

Conclusions
This paper analyzed the inﬂuence of Twitter users by employing three measures that capture different perspectives:
indegree, retweets, and mentions. We found that indegree
represents a user’s popularity, but is not related to other important notions of inﬂuence such as engaging audience, i.e.,
retweets and mentions. Retweets are driven by the content
value of a tweet, while mentions are driven by the name
value of the user. Such subtle differences lead to dissimilar
groups of the top Twitter users; users who have high indegree do not necessarily spawn many retweets or mentions.
This ﬁnding suggests that indegree alone reveals very little
about the inﬂuence of a user.
Focusing on retweets and mentions, we studied the dynamics of inﬂuence across topics and time. Our spatial analysis showed that most inﬂuential users can hold signiﬁcant
inﬂuence over a variety of topics. The top Twitter users
had a disproportionate amount of inﬂuence, which was indicated by a power-law distribution. Our temporal analysis identiﬁed how different types of inﬂuentials interact with
their audience. Mainstream news organizations consistently
spawned a high level of retweets over diverse topics. In contrast, celebrities were better at inducing mentions from their
audience. This is because the name value of the mention inﬂuentials helped them get responses from others, rather than
any inherent value in the content they posted.
Finally, we found that inﬂuence is not gained spontaneously or accidentally, but through concerted effort. In order to gain and maintain inﬂuence, users need to keep great
personal involvement. This could mean that inﬂuential users
are more predictable than suggested by theory (Watts 2007),
shedding light on how to identify emerging inﬂuential users.

17

