Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media

4chan and /b/: An Analysis of Anonymity
and Ephemerality in a Large Online Community
Michael S. Bernstein1 , Andrés Monroy-Hernández1 , Drew Harry1 ,
Paul André2 , Katrina Panovich1 and Greg Vargas1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
{msbernst, amonroy, dharry, kp, gvargas}@mit.edu

2

University of Southampton
SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
pa2@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Ren, Kraut, and Kiesler forthcoming; Grudin 2002). However, we have a limited understanding of how an anonymous
and ephemeral community design might actually play out —
especially at large scale.
In this paper we analyze one such large-scale, anonymous, and ephemeral community: the imageboard website
4chan. We focus on 4chan’s ﬁrst and most popular board,
the “random” board known as /b/. Our goal is to use /b/
as a lens to understand the concepts of anonymity and
ephemerality online. /b/ implements these concepts in more
extreme ways than most other online communities. First,
posts are fully anonymous by default and very rarely contain
pseudonyms or other identity signals. This lack of identity
makes traditional reputation systems unworkable. Second,
instead of archiving conversations, /b/ deletes them when
newer content arrives — often within minutes — which
leads to a chaotic, fast-paced experience. By making complete anonymity and content deletion the norm, /b/ lets us
study these concepts in situ at a larger scale than before.
This work quantiﬁes the outcomes of 4chan’s design decisions, and starts a discussion on how those decisions affect the community and its culture. Although /b/’s implementation of anonymity and ephemerality are extreme and
unusual, the concepts themselves are not unique. Sites like
Twitter, for instance, feel ephemeral because of their continuous content stream, while others like Formspring use
anonymity as a core feature. By studying the impact of different points on the identity and archival continuums, we can
broaden our understanding of community design strategies.
Readers may know of 4chan and /b/ (Figure 1) from their
inﬂuence on Internet culture and media coverage of their
off-site activities. The site boasts over seven million users
(Poole 2010) and is a proliﬁc meme factory: it originated
popular memes like LOLcats (Rutkoff 2007) and rickrolling
(Leckart 2009). Additionally, some 4chan and /b/ members
have been known to participate in highly visible off-site activities. These activities include manipulating a Time Magazine poll to elect 4chan’s creator the “World’s Most Inﬂuential Person” and participating in hacktivist group ‘Anonymous’. Anonymous has executed highly visible protests of
the Church of Scientology (Coleman 2011) and DDoS attacks against Mastercard and Paypal in support of Wikileaks (Mackey 2010). Reactions are diverse: while memes
have brought the site positive media attention (Brophy-

Abstract
We present two studies of online ephemerality and
anonymity based on the popular discussion board /b/
at 4chan.org: a website with over 7 million users that
plays an inﬂuential role in Internet culture. Although researchers and practitioners often assume that user identity and data permanence are central tools in the design
of online communities, we explore how /b/ succeeds despite being almost entirely anonymous and extremely
ephemeral. We begin by describing /b/ and performing
a content analysis that suggests the community is dominated by playful exchanges of images and links. Our
ﬁrst study uses a large dataset of more than ﬁve million
posts to quantify ephemerality in /b/. We ﬁnd that most
threads spend just ﬁve seconds on the ﬁrst page and less
than ﬁve minutes on the site before expiring. Our second study is an analysis of identity signals on 4chan,
ﬁnding that over 90% of posts are made by fully anonymous users, with other identity signals adopted and discarded at will. We describe alternative mechanisms that
/b/ participants use to establish status and frame their
interactions.

Introduction
Identity representation and archiving strategies are central
features to the design of online communities. However, our
current understanding of them focuses mainly on strong
identity and permanent archival. Researchers and practitioners argue that real names and pseudonyms can help “promote trust, cooperation, and accountability” (Millen and Patterson 2003), whereas anonymity may make communication impersonal and undermine credibility (Hiltz, Johnson,
and Turoff 1986; Rains 2007). Inﬂuential industry players
like Facebook argue that pseudonyms and multiple identities show “a lack of integrity” (Kirkpatrick 2010). Similarly, data permanence is also the norm: search engines will
resurface content years after it is created (Rosen 2010), social network sites allow friends to browse updates and photos from years ago, and online communities will often expect newcomers to read their archives (Millen 2000). Some
scholars have questioned these design approaches, suggesting that anonymous contributions and ephemeral participation online can be desirable (Lampe and Resnick 2004;
c 2011, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

50

)LOHMSJ .%[)888FYJMSJ
$QRQ\PRXV 6XQ 1R

low members to build a reputation. Our work extends this
research by studying the dynamics of a more thoroughly
anonymous community.
Evidence is mixed on how anonymity may affect an online community. In many scenarios, researchers argue for the
importance of identity-based reputation systems in promoting pro-social behavior (Millen and Patterson 2003). However, anonymity may foster stronger communal identity, as
opposed to bond-based attachment with individuals (Ren,
Kraut, and Kiesler forthcoming). Anonymity may impact
participation: it increases equity in classrooms (Collins and
Berge 1995), but results in more ‘ﬂaming’ on e-mail lists
(Thompsen and Ahn 1992). 4chan and /b/ play out these
concepts on a larger stage than has been previously studied.
Computer-mediated
communication
has
studied
anonymity in small groups, and our work reconsiders
their results in larger online communities. Removing
traditional social cues can make communication impersonal
(Short, Williams, and Christie 1976) and cold (Hiltz, Johnson, and Turoff 1986), and choosing to remain anonymous
will undermine credibility (Rains 2007). However, we
will argue that /b/’s community has developed alternative
credibility mechanisms — via language and images — that
still function effectively. Anonymity can also have positive
outcomes: groups working anonymously and with critical
confederates produce more ideas (Jessup, Connolly, and
Galegher 1990); non-anonymous groups feel more personal,
but have less overall cohesion (Tanis and Postmes 2007).
Ephemerality is rare in a large-scale online community,
and to our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to study it directly in situ. Most communities that have been studied
rely heavily on archives. For example, Millen (2000) reports
that community members often expect each other to search
group archives before asking new questions. Ephemerality may have community-wide downsides – a lack of history tends to decrease cooperation in social dilemma games
(Fehr and Gächter 2000). However, instituting permanence
in previously-unarchived chat rooms has elicited strong negative reactions (Hudson and Bruckman 2004).
Through our investigation of /b/, we hope to contribute
to scholarly conversations about data permanence. For example, Grudin (2002) suggests that we evolved to live in
an ephemeral world, yet our technology takes us from the
“here and now” to the “everywhere and forever.” Similarly,
Mayer-Schonberger (2009) emphasizes the value of “societal forgetting,” where “the limits of human memory ensure
that people’s sins are eventually forgotten.” Blanchette and
Johnson (2002) pointed to the recognition of social forgetfulness in three areas of social policy (bankruptcy law, juvenile crime records and credit reports), arguing that “data
retention and disposal should be addressed as a fundamental
characteristic of information.”
These topics are not just of academic interest, but have
clear practical implications for online social environments.
Practitioners face similar challenges. For example, online
game retailer Blizzard recently reversed a decision to require
the use of out-of-game identities in its online forums (M.G.
2010), Formspring found both popularity and controversy by
allowing teens to ask anonymous questions of their friends

LW VWKDWWLPHDJDLQE
!!

!!

$QRQ\PRXV 6XQ 1R
)LOHMSJ .%[
MSJ

$QRQ\PRXV 6XQ 1R
)LOHMSJ .%[MSJ

Figure 1: A “rageguy (FFFFUUUU) comic” themed thread
on /b/. Source: 4chanarchive.org, where /b/ members save
memorable threads.
Warren 2008), harassment and activism have often been
been negatively and sensationally covered. For example, a
Fox News afﬁliate called 4chan the “internet hate machine”
(Shuman 2007). However, some media outlets have proﬁled the site in more nuanced ways (Dibbell 2009; 2010;
Poole 2010). Much of this coverage is a response to /b/’s
distinctive culture – a culture that merits critical analysis beyond the scope of this paper. Here, we focus on the board’s
design choices of anonymity and ephemerality, and how they
may support or inﬂuence its culture.
In this paper, we perform a content analysis and two datadriven studies of /b/, focusing on anonymity and ephemerality. To begin, we survey related work. We then introduce
4chan, its design, and the /b/ board. To ground our discussion of the site, we perform a content analysis on a sample of
/b/ threads. We then turn to our two studies: 1) ephemerality,
tracking the site’s tempo and content deletion dynamics; 2)
anonymity, examining participant practices around identity.
A note before proceeding: large portions of the 4chan site,
and /b/ in particular, are offensive or obscene. We warn that
quotes and vocabulary in this paper may offend.

Related Work
Our work builds on prior literature on anonymity and
ephemerality. 4chan and /b/ can contribute insights into how
this literature plays out in the wild at large scale.
Online communities choose points on the spectrum of
anonymity — from completely unattributed to real names.
For example, while Facebook embraces real names (Facebook 2010), Myspace does not (Dwyer, Hiltz, and Passerini
2007), and some Usenet boards allow posting from anonymous e-mail addresses (Donath 1999). Slashdot decided to
enable anonymous commenting so users could feel more
free to speak their minds, then controlled behavior with
user moderation of comments (Lampe and Resnick 2004).
However, while they may allow fully anonymous posting,
anonymity is much less common in these communities than
on /b/. Gómez et al (2008) found that fully anonymous
posts made up only 18.6% of Slashdot comments. Instead,
pseudonymity tends to become the norm as usernames al-

51

Type
Themed

%
28%

Description
Setting theme, often with an exemplar image.
Offering content for the community to enjoy or critique.
Asking for suggestions or, often quite intimate, life advice.

Sharing content

19%

Question, advice
and recommendation

10%

Sharing Personal
Information

9%

Sharing or requesting content with personal information.

Discussion

8%

Calling for discussion, debate or some
back-and-forth over a topic.

Request for item

8%

Requesting information about previouslyseen images, or other valuable information such as credentials for pay sites.

Request for action

7%

Meta

5%

Intending to agitate for real-life action,
like harassing another website
Discussing /b/ itself or playing with the
site’s mechanics (e.g., post numbers)

Other

6%

Unable to categorize.

Example
ITT [“In this thread”] we only post stuff we have
laughed at so hard we had tears
This guy is a hero. :) http://www.youtube.com/[xxxxx]
Soup /b/ Recently I’ve been hanging out with a girl a
lot, we’re both in college. I spend the night at her place
all the time and we kiss and whatnot. Problem is, she
just broke up with her ex [...] and I know she’s not over
him. I really like her but I dunno what to do, so what do
/b/?
U JELLY? [“You jealous?”] This is me suiting up at my
formal looking fucking brilliant, then there is you fags
sitting back and watching.
Hi Anonymous! So ive started this game called League
of Legends a few days ago. [...] Is there anyone here
who also plays it? Lets talk about it!
anyone has a pic of that star wars battle tank with the
german insignia shooped [“photoshopped”] on it? in
return tits [a misogynous but common mechanism for
“paying back” a favor with pornographic images]
Make a group saying [name] is awesome on face book.
DO IT FAGGOTS
Heidi Ho there /b/ I’m a Newfag and now that i’ve been
here all Summer I was wondering if i need a letter of
recommendation From a Registered OldFag?
excuse all the blood

Table 1: Content typology of threads on /b/: appearance frequency and an exemplar (some quotes are paraphrased). (n = 598)
(boyd 2010a), and AOL angered its users when a hacker deanonymized old search logs (Barbaro and Jr. 2006).

4chan and /b/
4chan was created in 2004 by Christopher Poole as an online
discussion board focused on Japanese anime (Sorgatz 2009).
It has grown from its anime roots to encompass sixty boards
on topics ranging from politics to fashion, science and “sexy
beautiful women.” Poole, better known by his pseudonym
moot, created 4chan by copying the format of Futaba Channel, a popular Japanese discussion forum.1 4chan’s aesthetic
is simple, though it can appear confusing and cluttered: the
Wall Street Journal describes it as “archaic [...] a quaint
throwback to the earliest webpages” (Brophy-Warren 2008).
4chan is composed of boards, threads and posts. Each
board is themed (e.g., /v/ is “Video Games”). Like most discussion boards, 4chan groups posts into threads (Figure 2).
Posts starting a thread are required to include an image while
images on replies are optional. Threads are organized into
pages, where each page previews ﬁfteen threads with their
original post and a small sample of replies — users can click
through to read the entire thread.
In this paper, we focus on the 4chan “random” board,
known as /b/.2 We focus on /b/ not only because it is 4chan’s
ﬁrst and most active board — it claims 30% of all 4chan trafﬁc — but also because, in the words of its creator, it is the
“life force of the website”, and the place where “rowdiness
1
2

Figure 2: Structure of a 4chan board.
and lawlessness” happen (Sorgatz 2009).
Content ephemerality on 4chan is enforced by thread expiration and a large volume of incoming content. Threads
begin on page one and are pushed down as new threads are
added. If a user replies to a thread, it is bumped back to
the top of the ﬁrst page. If the thread reaches the bottom
of the ﬁfteenth page, the thread is removed permanently and
its URL returns a ‘Page Not Found’ error. This entire process can take place over a matter of minutes, as Study 1 will
demonstrate.
4chan’s anonymity plays out through its posting mechanisms and defaults. Unlike other sites, where being anonymous usually means not using your “real” name or identity,
most posts on /b/ are disconnected from any identity. There
are no accounts; all information is entered on a per-post ba-

http://www.4chan.org/faq
http://boards.4chan.org/b/

52

sis. If the user does not change the default empty name ﬁeld,
4chan assigns the name Anonymous. Even if a user claims
a pseudonym, any other user can claim it themselves in
any subsequent post. 4chan does have a cryptographicallypowered feature for users to guarantee their identity, called
a tripcode. Tripcodes use a password to generate a unique
string after the username (e.g., username!!Oo43raDvH61),
giving the password-holder a unique and inimitable identiﬁer. However, 4chan users largely eschew tripcodes and
pseudonyms, as Study 2 will show.

quickly, that the site is largely different with each page refresh. In this section, we quantitatively describe the temporal
properties and dynamics of posts on /b/. We compare /b/’s
volume to other sites to provide a sense of turnover speed.
We then relate how /b/ users have developed coping mechanisms like personal archives to cope with the quick expiration of material, as well as practices like “bumping” to
keep threads alive. Finally, we explore how strict ephemerality policies may actually encourage increased community
participation.

Content posted on /b/

Method

/b/’s content is frequently intentionally offensive, with little
held sacred. There is racist, sexist, homophobic language,
groups are often referred to using a “fag” sufﬁx (e.g., new
members are “newfags”, British users are “britfags”), and
a common response to any self-shot picture by a woman
is “tits or GTFO” (post a topless photo or get the f***
out). This language is part of the group identity: pushing
the bounds of propriety in order to “hack the attention economy” and turn heads (boyd 2010b). While the content on /b/
can be offensive, it can also be funny, open, and creative, as
its creation and promotion of numerous memes attests to.
In order to characterize the content and discourse on the
board, we began with eight months of participant observation on the site. Using a series of informal samples of
thread-starting posts on /b/, we conducted a grounded analysis (Charmaz 2006) similar to that which has been applied
to other kinds of online participation (Naaman, Boase, and
Lai 2010). After a few rounds of iteration, we settled on a
scheme with nine high-level categories to describe the different kinds of posts that initiate threads on /b/. To measure the
relative frequency of these thread categories, we collected a
sample of 598 thread-initiating posts over the course of ten
days (November 16–26, 2010). The threads were selected
such that their temporal distribution matches the underlying
distribution of 4chan posts. Our sample included the text and
accompanying image from the post that started the thread.
Table 1 reports the thread composition in our sample. In
keeping with /b/’s identity as an image board and the requirement that each thread-starter post an image, a common
purpose of the board is to share images and web content. The
two most prevalent thread types (Themed, 28%, and Sharing Content, 19%) both revolve around images and make up
nearly half of all threads in our sample. There is also evidence for the off-/b/ activities that the media focuses on:
threads attempting to organize such activities (Request for
Action) make up 7% of the sample. Of those threads, the
poster often attempted to generate comments on Facebook
or Youtube pages or get people to call a particular phone
number. /b/’s posters often disdain such calls because they
are seen as self-serving, dismissing them by replying “/b/ is
not your personal army.” In the future, we plan to examine
whether content category is associated with outcomes like
thread length or reply frequency.

We collected a dataset of activity on /b/ for two weeks: July
19–August 2, 2010. 3 This data includes 5,576,096 posts in
482,559 threads. Although there are likely some phenomena
that inﬂuence /b/’s posts over longer time scales than two
weeks (e.g. holidays), most of the major daily and weekly
cycles are represented in a sample of this size. The dataset is
missing a negligible number of posts during high-load periods. These missing posts are relatively randomly distributed
and we do not believe that they impact our analysis. We did
not capture images due to concerns over the nature of the
material that may be posted to the website.
We calculated the time each thread spent on /b/ by replaying the history of all post events from our two-week dataset.
We used creation timestamps as reported by the website to
simulate the positions of each thread. For example, after a
thread has a new reply, it moves to the top position on the
ﬁrst page; after a post is made in another thread, the ﬁrst
thread is pushed down to the second position. By replaying
this history, we calculated the lifetime for each thread.

Results
Entire Lifetime The majority of threads have a short lifespan and a small number of replies; the median life of a thread
is just 3.9 minutes. Thread lifetimes are right-skewed similar
to a power law, making the mean less meaningful: 9.1 minutes (σ = 16.0 min). The fastest thread to expire was gone
in 28 seconds (i.e., a thread with no responses during a very
high activity period); the longest-lived lasted 6.2 hours (i.e.,
a thread with frequent new posts to bump it). Six hours is a
very long time in /b/, but it is near-instantaneous when compared to the forever-archived nature of most other websites.
The longest-lived thread in our dataset was a discussion
of paganism. The original poster was a pagan who advertised the opportunity to Ask A Pagan Anything, remarking
“go on do your worst (or alternatively actually get my respect and actually ask something useful).” One question was
“how do you worship your so called gods?”, with the answer
“From day to day just by reveling in the beauty and wonder
of life, in all it’s forms [sic] from studying martial arts to satiﬁe [sic] my masculinity to taking care of my garden.” Other
questions included “How does it feel knowing Christianity
raped your religion?”, “What exactly do you worship?”, and
“Do you believe in magic?” Other long-lived threads fell in
the “themed” category, like a “creepypasta thread”, “info

Study 1. Ephemerality

3
More information about our data collection tool available at
http://projects.csail.mit.edu/chanthropology

Ephemerality is one of /b/’s most striking qualities. The
board moves at such a fast pace, and threads expire so

53

   

threads” (posting useful knowledge about some topic, like
how to tie a tie or keyboard shortcuts), and self-shot nudity.
Short-lived threads on /b/ varied, but many were failed
attempts to get the community’s attention (e.g., “Well guyz,
I hope you’re glad the captcha is gone, woo yeah, let’s all be
random lolz!”). The short-lived posts often came in spurts
during high-activity periods when it was easy to miss them.
As might be implied by short lifetimes, a large number of
threads (43%) get no replies at all; the median is 2 posts per
thread, the original post and one reply. This 43% ﬁgure is
roughly consistent with Usenet, where 40% of posts get no
reply (Joyce and Kraut 2006). Again, some threads become
quite large, resulting in a mean of 13.27 posts/thread (σ =
37.28 posts, min = 1, max = 519).



#$


 
$ 
 

  ! " 







 
 

  

 


First Page Only Another way to look at how ephemerality
plays out in the board is by looking at each thread’s exposure to the ﬁrst page. The ﬁrst page of results is where many
items, like search results, get much of their overall visibility
and click-throughs (Joachims et al. 2005).
The median thread spends just 5 seconds on the ﬁrst page
over its entire lifetime. The mean time on the ﬁrst page is 36
seconds (σ = 109 sec). The fastest thread was pushed off the
ﬁrst page in less than one second (actually, 58 of them shared
this dubious honor), and the most prominent thread spent 37
minutes on the ﬁrst page cumulatively over its lifetime.
The thread that spent the most time on the ﬁrst page was a
“roll” thread (a meta thread in our content analysis, playing
with the mechanics of the board). In a roll thread, /b/ posters
reply to get a 4chan-assigned post number (e.g., 1234567),
and the last digit of their post number instructs them on an
action to take. In this case, participants had to share personal
secrets, a game that combines Spin the Bottle with Truth or
Dare. Example responses included: “honestly, i dont know.
Nothing has ever made me feel too terriﬁed for my life.
Maybe when I had taken too much cocaine and thought my
heart was gonna overwhelm itself”, “I gave into temptation
by having two boyfriends at once instead of 1”, “chose 9 i
get angry at the idea of people having control over me and
abusing it or manipulating me, a weird contrast to my mind
control fetish”, and “blue 5: my biggest regret is not asking
her out”.



 

Figure 3: Daily board activity in our two-week dataset.
Thread Lifetime and Exposure to First Page are medians;
Threads per Hour averages the volume during that hour over
fourteen days. All times in EST.
Time of Day /b/’s daily trends can help us understand how
ephemerality is affected by time of day. The slower the trafﬁc on /b/, the longer a thread will last.
Threads last the longest between 9am and 10am EST and
expire fastest between 5pm and 7pm EST. High activity is
sustained until 3am or 4am EST. This result suggests that,
despite the not infrequent references to European and British
users (e.g. “eurofags” and “britfags”), the demographics of
/b/ are primarily North Americans that use the website after
business or school hours. Figure 3 shows the synchronized
spikes in lifespan and drop in number of posts per thread.

Discussion
/b/ creates a sense of ephemerality through a fast tempo
and content deletion. In regards to tempo, we found that
the board had roughly 35,000 threads and 400,000 posts
per day. For comparison, Usenet volume (which still continues to grow) across all Big-8 newsgroups is 25,000 posts
per day4 , or 1/16th of /b/’s volume. Szabo and Huberman
(2010) found that Digg has about 7,100 “threads” each day
(1.3 million over six months), and 65,000 new YouTube
videos each day. So, /b/ has roughly the same amount of
posting activity as arenas like Usenet and Youtube, but all of
this activity happens in one forum board.
Though the site may be ephemeral, /b/ users have developed other mechanisms to keep valuable content. For example, users often refer to having a “/b/ folder” on their computers where they preserve images for future enjoyment or
remixing. /b/ posters ask others to dig into their archives;
for example, this user wants to shock a friend, and donates
an image of a cat in return: “Have a friend here, need the
most fucked up shit you have in your /b folder, can’t provide much, considering not on my comp, but here is a cat.”
/b/ users have also developed sites like 4chanarchive.org to
save particularly important or “epic” threads.
Content deletion may play a role in pushing the /b/ community to quickly iterate and generate popular memes like

User Control over Ephemerality: Bumping and Sage
4chan has developed two main ways for users to control
thread ephemerality: bumping and sage. Bumping means replying to a thread to keep it alive, sometimes explicitly with
a phrase like “bump”, “bumping” or “bamp”. In our sample, we observed that 2.16% of all replies contained these
words or similar inﬂections. This is a lower-bound estimate,
since any post will effectively “bump” a thread. The second
method of control is sage, which allows a user to comment
on a thread but not bump it to the ﬁrst page (i.e., bury it).
This lets users comment on a disliked thread without attracting attention to it, and to count the reply toward a systemenforced bump limit, thus ensuring the thread will expire
more quickly. We found that 0.77% of all replies used the
sage feature. So, /b/ posters will explicitly manipulate the
ephemerality of some threads, though they seem more likely
to promote threads than bury them.

4

54

http://www.newsadmin.com/top100tmsgs.asp

Name
Anonymous
David
–
OP
(blank)
sage
anonymous
noko

LOLcats, Advice Dog and Archaic Rap. Having no history
moderates some the “rich get richer” phenomena (Barabási
and Albert 1999). 4chan’s founder has argued that /b/’s “lack
of retention [. . . ] lends itself to having fresh content,” so
only the ﬁttest memes survive (Sorgatz 2009). To keep content around, users must make an explicit decision to save it
to their hard drive and repost it later.
Finally, and perhaps unintuitively, ephemerality may raise
community participation. One may think users would see no
point to contributing if their actions will be removed within
minutes. However, if /b/ users want to keep a thread from
expiring within minutes, they need to keep conversation active. This “bump” practice, combined with a norm of quick
replies, may encourage community members to contribute
content. This hypothesis was derived from our observations,
and will need to be tested more rigorously.

Num. of Posts
5,022,149
59,320
14,070
13,576
13,077
13,003
6,150
5,727

% of Posts
90.07%
1.06%
0.25%
0.24%
0.23%
0.23%
0.11%
0.10%

Table 2: The most popular post names on /b/ during our
two-week sample. Anonymous has over ninety percent of
the posts (n = 5, 576, 095).
E-mail
(blank)
sage
Noko
:stopsound:
:soundoff:

Study 2. Identity and Anonymity
/b/ makes it easy to participate without requiring a real
or even pseudonymous identity. In this section, we investigate the frequency of the most common names used by /b/
posters, we discuss the impact of anonymity on /b/’s culture,
and report on /b/’s alternative status and authenticity signals.
We also discuss the effects of anonymity-fuelled disinhibition, like those seen in the “relationship advice” threads and
“Anonymous” raids.

Num. of Posts
5,478,573
39,725
5,037
3,377
1,627

% of Posts
98.25%
0.71%
0.09%
0.06%
0.02%

Table 3: The most common emails on /b/ during our twoweek sample. Most posts leave the e-mail ﬁeld blank (n =
5, 576, 095).
Tripcodes are the only way a 4chan user can guarantee
that they are the same author of a previous post; however,
they are very rarely used. Only 0.05% (281,367) of posts
– one twentieth of one percent of our sample – contained
a tripcode. Even this number may be inﬂated, because participating in the “David” in-joke mentioned above required
using a shared tripcode among many users, which is uncommon. Ignoring the “David!4changtcqk” tripcode occurrences lowers the total to 0.04% (211,068).

Method
Using our two-week data sample, we analyzed the identity
metadata of each post. /b/ allows posters to enter no name
(“Anonymous”), choose any name, or use a cryptographic
identity mechanism known as a tripcode. We investigated the
prevalence of each of these identity markers in our dataset.

Results

Discussion

It is extremely uncommon to post using a name or
pseudonym on /b/. In our sample, 90.07% (5,022,149) of
posts were credited to the default name “Anonymous” (Table 2). The closest comparison available in the literature is
that anonymous commenting makes up 18.6% of Slashdot
comments (Gómez, Kaltenbrunner, and López 2008). The
remaining 10% use a wide diversity of names. Some relate to
an inside joke where many users claimed one name, David,5
and others show mistaken uses of 4chan-speciﬁc keywords
like sage or noko. Some users claimed to be “OP” (the original poster of the thread), demonstrating a way in which /b/
posters ﬂuidly claim identity when needed.
E-mails are even less common (Table 3). Fully 98.3%
(5,478,573) of posts in our sample did not contain an email. Of those that did complete the e-mail ﬁeld, 40.73%
(39,725) are not actual emails but rather posts trying not to
bump the thread (using the sage feature). The rest are misspellings of 4chan’s special commands, some of them temporary. For example, “:stopsound:” got rid of the vuvuzela
buzzing that 4chan administrators added to the page during
the 2010 World Cup.

The usual narrative around anonymity suggests that communities beneﬁt by revealing participants’ names and reputations (Millen and Patterson 2003), and that anonymity will
be a negative inﬂuence due to the “online disinhibition effect” (Suler 2005). Certainly, /b/ is a crude place and is given
to antisocial behavior. Not only does anonymity invoke disinhibition on /b/, but styling the collective as “Anonymous”
also suggests de-individuation and mob behavior. It may be
safe for /b/ posters to act in a way they never would do ofﬂine because they can be relatively certain that their actions
will not come back to haunt them.
However, the dynamics on 4chan and /b/ also suggest
ways that anonymity can be a positive feature for communities. Disinhibition can be beneﬁcial: in advice and discussion
threads, anonymity may provide a cover for more intimate
and open conversations. For example, in Table 1, the poster
asks anonymously for advice about a potential girlfriend.
Such threads are quite common. In addition, anonymity may
encourage experimentation with new ideas or memes. As
seen in Study 1, failure is quite common on 4chan: almost
half of all threads receive no replies. Anonymity masks that
failure, softening the blow of being ignored or explicitly

5
http://encyclopediadramatica.com/
Operation_/b/ipolar

55

only possible by someone with particular skill or knowledge
(Smith and Harper 1995).
That communities enforce boundaries and communicate
status using language and differentiated social practices is
perhaps not surprising in the social psychology literature.
What we see as particularly noteworthy in this case is how
these boundary-sustaining practices are informed by the
technical context in which they take place. Furthermore, the
extreme nature of community practices on /b/ can obscure
the underlying role these behaviors play to the casual observer. We see our role as partly one of translating these
practices into terms familiar to scholars.

Figure 4: Timestamping lets users circumvent technological
barriers to guarantee identity. Source: 4chanarchive.org.
chastised for trying to start uninteresting threads (Dibbell
2010). In communities with stronger identity mechanics, a
history of poor posts would never go away. On 4chan, it is
irrelevant.
/b/ has given rise to more ﬂuid practices to signal identity
and status in spite of, or perhaps because of, the lack of technological support. Because anyone can post a picture and
claim to be that person, /b/’s posters have developed a practice of “timestamping” to guarantee authenticity. To claim
identity, users often take a picture of themselves with a note
containing the current day and time (Figure 4).
To communicate high status in the community, most users
tend to turn to textual, linguistic, and visual cues. In many
communities, including /b/, slang plays a role in delineating group membership (Eble 1996). Simply writing in 4chan
dialect is non-obvious to outsiders and in-dialect writing
serves as an entry-level signal of membership and status.
Second, images on 4chan function a bit like fashion. Speciﬁc
classes of images have periods of limited experimentation,
turning into wider adoption, followed by subsequent abandonment. Fluency in the styles that are in vogue is an important way to signal status, as in fashion (Simmel 1957). Lack
of ﬂuency is dismissed with the phrase “LURK MOAR”,
asking the poster to spend more time learning about the culture of the board.
One example status signal in /b/ is the classic barrier for
newcomers called “triforcing.” Triforcing means leaving
a post using Unicode to mimic the three-triangle icon of
popular video game The Legend of Zelda:

Conclusion
In this article we investigate the 4chan /b/ board as a vehicle
for understanding the effects of ephemerality and anonymity
in online communities.
Analyzing ephemerality via two weeks of of site activity,
we found that the median thread spends just ﬁve seconds on
/b/’s ﬁrst page before being pushed off by newer posts, and
that the median thread expires completely within ﬁve minutes. Even in a world informed by Twitter and newsfeeds,
where content is out of users’ attentional sphere quickly, we
argue that such rapid content deletion drives many of /b/’s
community dynamics. On /b/, ephemerality and deletion create a powerful selection mechanic by requiring content the
community wants to see be repeatedly reposted, and potentially remixed. We believe this is critical to the site’s inﬂuence on internet culture and memes.
We then examined anonymity on /b/. We found that over
90% of posts are made completely anonymously, and just
one twentieth of one percent of posts use system mechanisms like tripcodes to guarantee identity. Instead, the /b/
community uses non-technical mechanisms like slang and
timestamping to signal status and identity. Consistent with
common identity theory (Ren, Kraut, and Kiesler forthcoming), /b/’s anonymity is likely shaping a strong communal
identity among a very large set of individuals.
We hope to open the door to future 4chan work. 4chan
is widely credited with being the source of many online
memes, making it an excellent venue for studying innovation diffusion. By tracking images (and genres of images) we
could see how trends spread through 4chan and into the wild.
It is also clear that 4chan represents only one part of a larger
online ecosystem. Future work might focus on how 4chan’s
users move between other tools and interaction venues to organize both online and ofﬂine action. Finally, a closer study
of the content on 4chan and its users would enable us to
make more substantial claims about the relationship between
4chan’s design and its users’ practices and culture.
As large Internet players like Facebook or Google evolve
their models for identity and archiving, it becomes increasingly important to understand what happens in large communities that occupy the opposite positions on the user identity and data permanence design continuums. Communities
like 4chan have immense impact on Internet culture, and
/b/’s anonymous, ephemeral community design is playing
a strong role in that cultural inﬂuence.

Newcomers will be taunted by a challenge that “newfags
can’t triforce.” Uninitiated users will then copy and paste
an existing triforce into their reply. It will look like a
correct triforce in the reply ﬁeld; however, after posting, the
alignment is wrong:

The only way to display high status and produce a correct
triforce on 4chan is to use a complicated series of Unicode
character codes. In signaling theory terms, we can think
of triforcing as an index: a signal whose presentation is

56

Acknowledgements

Jessup, L.; Connolly, T.; and Galegher, J. 1990. The effects of
anonymity on GDSS group process with an idea-generating task.
MIS Quarterly 14(3):313–321.
Joachims, T.; Granka, L.; Pan, B.; Hembrooke, H.; and Gay, G.
2005. Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as implicit feedback. In Proc. of SIGIR, 154–161.
Joyce, E., and Kraut, R. 2006. Predicting continued participation
in newsgroups. J. of Computer-Mediated Comm. 11(3):723–747.
Kirkpatrick, D. 2010. The Facebook Effect. Simon & Schuster.
Lampe, C., and Resnick, P. 2004. Slash(dot) and burn: distributed
moderation in a large online conversation space. In Proc. of CHI,
543–550.
Leckart, S. 2009. The Ofﬁcial Prankonomy: From rickrolls to
malware, a spectrum of stunts. Wired 17(9):91–93.
Mackey, R. 2010. ‘Operation Payback’ Attacks Target MasterCard
and PayPal Sites to Avenge WikiLeaks. New York Times.
Mayer-Schonberger, V. 2009. Delete: The Virtue of Forgetting in
the Digital Age. Princeton University Press.
M.G. 2010. A Blizzard of protest over privacy. Economist.
Millen, D. R., and Patterson, J. F. 2003. Identity disclosure and the
creation of social capital. In Proc. of CHI, 720–721.
Millen, D. R. 2000. Community portals and collective goods:
Conversation archives as an information resource. HICSS.
Naaman, M.; Boase, J.; and Lai, C. 2010. Is it really about me?:
message content in social awareness streams. In Proc. of CSCW,
189–192.
Poole, C. 2010. The case for anonymity online. TED2010.
Rains, S. 2007. The impact of anonymity on perceptions of source
credibility and inﬂuence in computer-mediated group communication: A test of two competing hypotheses. Communication Research 34(1):100.
Ren, Y.; Kraut, R. E.; and Kiesler, S. forthcoming. Encouraging
commitment in online communities. In Kraut, R., and Resnick, P.,
eds., Evidence-based social design: Mining the social sciences to
build online communities. MIT Press.
Rosen, J. 2010. The web means the end of forgetting. The New
York Times.
Rutkoff, A. 2007. With ‘LOLcats’ Internet Fad, Anyone Can Get
In on the Joke. Wall Street Journal 25.
Short, J.; Williams, E.; and Christie, B. 1976. The social psychology of telecommunications. Wiley London.
Shuman, P.
2007.
Fox 11 investigates: ‘anonymous’.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DNO6G4ApJQY.
Simmel, G. 1957. Fashion. Am. J. of Soc. 62(6):541–558.
Smith, M., and Harper, D. 1995. Animal signals: models and terminology. Journal of Theoretical Biology 177(3):305–311.
Sorgatz, R. 2009. Macroanonymous is the new microfamous.
http://ﬁmoculous.com/archive/post-5738.cfm.
Suler, J. 2005. The online disinhibition effect. International Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies 2(2):184–188.
Szabo, G., and Huberman, B. A. 2010. Predicting the popularity
of online content. Commun. ACM 53:80–88.
Tanis, M., and Postmes, T. 2007. Two faces of anonymity: Paradoxical effects of cues to identity in CMC. Computers in Human
Behavior 23(2):955–970.
Thompsen, P. A., and Ahn, D. 1992. To be or not to be: An exploration of e-prime, copula deletion and ﬂaming in electronic mail.
Et Cetera: A Review of General Semantics 146–164.

We would like to thank for their feedback: danah boyd,
Amy Bruckman, Gabriella Coleman, Danyel Fisher, Benjamin Mako Hill, Alex Leavitt, Rob Miller, Lisa Nakamura,
Chris Schmandt, Christina Xu and Sarita Yardi.

References
Barabási, A., and Albert, R. 1999. Emergence of scaling in random
networks. Science 286(5439):509.
Barbaro, M., and Jr., T. Z. 2006. A Face Is Exposed for AOL
Searcher No. 4417749. New York Times.
Blanchette, J., and Johnson, D. G. 2002. Data retention and the
panoptic society: The social beneﬁts of forgetfulness. The Information Society: An International Journal 18(1):33.
boyd, d. 2010a. Harassment by q & a: Initial thoughts on formspring.me. http://dmlcentral.net/blog/danah-boyd/harassment-qainitial-thoughts-formspringme.
boyd, d. 2010b. “for the lolz”: 4chan is hacking the attention economy. http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2010/06/12/forthe-lolz-4chan-is-hacking-the-attention-economy.html.
Brophy-Warren, J. 2008. Modest web site is behind a bevy of
memes. Wall Street Journal.
Charmaz, K. 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical
Guide Through Qualitative Analysis. London: Sage Publications.
Coleman, G.
2011.
”’I did it for the lulz! but i
stayed for the outrage:’ anonymous, the politics of spectacle, and geek protests against the church of scientology.”.
http://techtv.mit.edu/videos/10237.
Collins, M., and Berge, Z. 1995. Introduction: Computer-mediated
communications and the online classroom in higher education. In
Berge, Z., and Collins, M., eds., Computer mediated communication and the online classroom: Vol. 2. Higher education. Hampton
Press. 1–10.
Dibbell, J. 2009. The Assclown Offensive: How to Enrage the
Church of Scientology. Wired.
Dibbell, J. 2010. Radical Opacity. Technology Review.
Donath, J. 1999. Identity and Deception in the Virtual Community.
In Kollock, P., and Smith, M., eds., Communities in Cyberspace.
London: Routledge.
Dwyer, C.; Hiltz, S.; and Passerini, K. 2007. Trust and privacy
concern within social networking sites: A comparison of Facebook
and MySpace. In Proc. of AMCIS.
Eble, C. 1996. Slang & sociability: In-group language among
college students. The University of North Carolina Press.
Facebook. 2010. Statement of rights and responsibilities.
http://www.facebook.com/terms.php.
Fehr, E., and Gächter, S. 2000. Cooperation and punishment in
public goods experiments. The Am. Econ. Rev. 90(4):980–994.
Gómez, V.; Kaltenbrunner, A.; and López, V. 2008. Statistical
analysis of the social network and discussion threads in slashdot.
In Proc. of WWW, 645–654. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Grudin, J. 2002. Group dynamics and ubiquitous computing. Commun. ACM 45(12):74–78.
Hiltz, S.; Johnson, K.; and Turoff, M. 1986. Experiments in group
decision making communication process and outcome in face-toface versus computerized conferences. Human Communication Research 13(2):225–252.
Hudson, J. M., and Bruckman, A. 2004. “Go away”: Participant
objections to being studied and the ethics of chatroom research.
The Information Society: An International Journal 20(2):127.

57

